From postmaster at lance.colostate.edu Sun May 14 03:26:42 1995
Status: O
X-VM-v5-Data: ([nil t nil nil nil nil nil nil nil]
        ["19261" "Sun" "14" "May" "1995" "00:30:18" "-0600" "subscription requests only" "lambic-request at lance.colostate.edu" nil "373" "Lambic Digest #603 (May 14, 1995)" "^Date:" nil nil "5" nil nil nil nil]
        nil)
Received: by truelies.rs.itd.umich.edu (8.6.12/2.2)
        with X.500 id DAA22934; Sun, 14 May 1995 03:26:39 -0400
Received: from goodman.itn.med.umich.edu by truelies.rs.itd.umich.edu (8.6.12/2.2)
        with SMTP id DAA22924; Sun, 14 May 1995 03:26:38 -0400
Received: from longs.lance.colostate.edu by goodman.itn.med.umich.edu with SMTP id AA12965
  (5.65b/IDA-1.4.3 for spencer at umich.edu); Sun, 14 May 95 03:26:36 -0400
Received: (daemon at localhost) by longs.lance.colostate.edu (8.6.9/8.6.5a (LANCE 1.01)) id AAA27159 for reallambic at longs.lance.colostate.edu; Sun, 14 May 1995 00:30:18 -0600
Message-Id: <199505140630.AAA27159 at longs.lance.colostate.edu>
Reply-To: lambic at lance.colostate.edu (postings only - do not send subscription requests here)
Errors-To: lambic-request at lance.colostate.edu
Date: Sun, 14 May 1995 00:30:18 -0600
From: lambic-request at lance.colostate.edu (subscription requests only - do not post here)
To: lambic at lance.colostate.edu
Subject: Lambic Digest #603 (May 14, 1995)






Lambic Digest #603                             Sun 14 May 1995




        Forum on Lambic Beers (and other Belgian beer styles)
                Mike Sharp, Digest Coordinator




Contents:
  A honeymoon only brewers would go on (Michael Sharp)
  Brasserie Cantillon (Michael Sharp)




Send article submissions only to: lambic at longs.lance.colostate.edu
Send all other administrative requests (subscribe/unsubscribe/change) to:
     lambic-request at longs.lance.colostate.edu
Back issues are available by mail; send empty message with subject 'HELP' to:
     netlib at longs.lance.colostate.edu
Phil Seitz' series on Brewing Belgian Beer is available; the index
     from the archives lists individual topics and the complete set.
     Start with the help message above then request the index.
A FAQ is also available by netlib; say 'send faq from lambic' as the
     subject or body of your message (to netlib at longs.lance.colostate.edu).


----------------------------------------------------------------------


Date: Sat, 13 May 95 18:37:45 PDT
From: Michael Sharp <msharp at Synopsys.COM>
Subject: A honeymoon only brewers would go on




A honeymoon only brewers would take.


Not long ago I stepped into the world of wedded bliss.  In celebration 
of this, to where did my new bride and I travel?  Some exotic island?  
Some well known resort Mecca?  No, since we are both amateur brewers 
there was only one answer -- Belgium.  Not only just Belgium, but 
Belgium with a purpose.


This series of articles will cover our visits in the order in which we 
made them.  These visits include: Brasserie Cantillon, Brouwerij De 
Troch, Brouwerij Belle-Vue, Brouwerij Hoegaarden, Brouwerij Boon, 
Brouwerij Rodenbach, and Brasserie Dupont.  The final articles in this 
series will cover all of the odds and ends of the trip -- a visit to the 
Musee de Biere in Lustin, a brewpub in Leuven, and a lot more.


------------------------------


Date: Sat, 13 May 95 18:39:08 PDT
From: Michael Sharp <msharp at Synopsys.COM>
Subject: Brasserie Cantillon




Brasserie Cantillon


When three lambic devotees find themselves in Brussels on a Saturday 
where else but Cantillon would they go?  Rob Thomas, a Lambic Digest 
subscriber who I had just met the day before, Sheri Almeda and I found 
ourselves taking everything but a direct path from our hotel to 
Cantillon.  Even with the "scenic" route we took we still managed to get 
to the brewery a mere five minutes late.


Upon arrival we where greeted by Jean Pierre Van Roy, the brewer of 
Cantillon products, as well as his wife Claude and his son Jean.  After 
sampling one of the brewery's gueuze, it was Jean who took us on our 
tour.


We where lucky in that it was a quiet day at the brewery.  This allowed 
for a much longer and more detail packed visit than I had expected.


The brewery itself dates back to 1900.  It still contains the original 
equipment for the production of a 7.5HL batch size.  As of my visit, the 
brewery had produced 13 batches of this size and the 13th batch was 
probably going to be the last of this year.  This places the brewery's 
total production for the '94/'95 brewing season at just under 100HL.


The layout of the brewery itself, excluding the bottling line, and 
barrel storage, is as follows.  The ground floor contains an industrial 
boiler for hot water & steam (the kettles are steam heated).  This floor 
also contains a small room with the mash/lauter tun, a hop back, and the 
bottoms of the two kettles.  One floor above this is the top of the two 
kettles as well as the grain mill.  All of the equipment dates back to 
the construction of the brewery.  Of particular note is the use of a 
belt and pulley system to provide power to the mash tun, pumps, and 
other brewery equipment.


The wort is produced by a turbid mash of roughly 34% unmalted wheat and 
66% malt.  This wort is then boiled with aged Kent hops until it has 
lost approximately 25% of its volume (from 10,000 liters initially to 
7,500L after the boil).


On the Lambic Digest there has been much discussion of the exact 
schedule for turbid mashing.  As a result of this I took the opportunity 
to obtain the full schedule.


                Malt - 850Kg
                Wheat - 450Kg
                      |
~8-900 liters         |
H2O  at  62C  -->It takes 15 to 20 min. to
              mix all the grain and H2O.
              This results in mash
              temperature of 45C.
                      |
              mash held at 45C for
              10 min.
                      |
H2O  at  100C -->In ~6 min. enough H2O
              is added to bring the
              mash to 58C
                      |
              In ~5 min. ~300L is
              transferred to kettle #2 ---------------->|
                      |                          ~300L in kettle #2
H2O  at  100C -->In ~10 min. enough H2O             is heated.  during
              is added to bring the              the heating it never
              mash to 65C                        reaches 100C
                      |                                 |
              In ~35 min. ~1200L is                     |
              transferred to kettle #2 ---------------->|
                      |                          an additional ~1200L
H2O  at  100C -->In ~10 min. enough H2O             is added to kettle #2
              is added to bring the              and the heating of this
              mash to 72C                        kettle continues.  it
                      |                          never reaches 100C
              mash held at 72C for                      |
              20 min.                                   |
                      |                                 |
                      +----> first runnings (~1500L)    |
                             to kettle #1.  begin       |
                             heating of this kettle     |
                             for the boil               |
                                                        |
                                                 transfer the contents
                                                 of kettle #2 back to
                      |<-------------------------the mash tun. At this
                      |                          time the contents of
              the mash is now                    this kettle has reached
              at ~75C                            ~80C
                      |
              mash held at 75C for
              20 min.
                      |
              recirculate the wort
              in the mash tun to
              clarify.
                      |
              sparge with 85C H2O
                      |
              split wort between the
              two kettles as it runs off.
              kettle #1 will contain ~6500L
              total (including the 1500L
              previously put there)  kettle #2
              will contain ~3250L total.
                      |
              add 21KG aged hops to kettle #1
              only.  heat both kettles to boiling
              and allow the volume to be reduced
              by ~25% to yield a full batch size
              of 7500L total between the two
              kettles.  The contents of the two
              kettles are blended together before
              cooling overnight.


This particular mash technique is unique to lambic breweries.  No other 
style of beer involves this particular mashing process.  Though it is 
not used by all of the lambic brewers, it is in use at the majority of 
the remaining lambic breweries.  Among the brewers there are mixed 
feelings as to the need for this process.  At Brasserie Cantillon, 
Brouwerij De Troch, and Brouwerij Boon it is used because that is the 
way it has always been done.  At Brouwerij Belle-Vue they use a 
substantially different technique which I will cover in my article on 
that brewery.  Much later in my trip, during a discussion with Professor 
Verachtert of the Katholieke Universiteit du Leuven, it was suggested 
that this particular process lends little to the brewing of lambic and 
the results of the Belle-Vue process would tend to support this.


Returning to the brewery tour, after the wort is boiled it is cooled 
overnight in a large coolship.  This coolship is located in the eaves of 
the brewery in a room designed to allow the winds of the area to blow 
across the coolship.  This is not only where the wort is cooled, but it 
is also where the wort is inoculated by the wild yeasts and bacteria 
carried by the winds.  This is undoubtedly the most important step in 
the brewing of lambic.  Without the inoculation of the wort by these 
wild organisms the lambic would not have its characteristic flavors and 
aromas.


After cooling, the freshly inoculated wort is pumped into oak barrels 
where it is allowed to ferment and develop for no less than a full year 
and sometimes significantly longer.  The barrels themselves will also 
lend to the inoculation of the wort with microorganisms resident in the 
wood.  


After lengthy fermentations comes the complex task of deciding what each 
barrel will be used for, as well as blending the contents of barrels 
into a consistent product.  Fruits, particularly raspberry and cherry, 
may be added to the year old lambic and allowed to referment to produce 
the base for the two lambic based fruit beers.  Other young barrels may 
be left untouched for years to provide a basis for the very complex 
gueuze.


When it comes time to blend the final product, regardless of it is to be 
a gueuze, framboise, or kriek, there are a number of difficulties.  
First, the contents of each barrel is unique.  Some barrels may be very 
sour, some may have a strong aroma, and so on.  All of these have to be 
blended together with an understanding of how the final product will 
change as it ages in the bottle.  In addition to the goal of obtaining a 
consistent character, there is also the goal of needing enough residual 
sugar to allow the final product to bottle condition.  This is not a 
skill which can be described.  It can only be understood through years 
of experience.


After the tour of the brewery itself we where allowed to taste lambic of 
various ages directly from the barrels.  It is at this point in the 
article that I really appreciate Rob Thomas' presence.  While I have my 
own notes on the various beers we tasted, Rob's notes on the barrel 
tasting are much better than mine.  I have taken the liberty of using 
Rob's notes as a reference in writing some of the tasting impressions.


The first barrel we tasted from was 3 weeks old.  There was an evident, 
but low, hop bitterness without the accompanying hop aroma.  This was a 
very yeasty tasting beer with a sweet flavor from the sugars still to be 
fermented.  It was obvious that the beer was still fermenting strongly 
though the primary fermentation seemed to have subsided since the barrel 
was tightly bunged.  This would seem to imply that either the primary 
organisms in this barrel where not very attenuative or that the turbid 
mash resulted in a very large amount of sugars which could not be 
assimilated by the primary fermenting organisms.  This is, however, 
nothing but a supposition on my part.


The next two barrels we tasted from where rather similar.  The first 
barrel was one year old and the second was two years old.  Neither had the 
signature sourness of the final product.  I would say that these where 
rather soft in character with the sweetness present in the 3 week old 
barrel significantly diminished in the one year old and further reduced in 
the two year old.  Neither of these barrels alone could match the balance 
and complexity of the bottled product.  Both where still lacking in some 
of the character that is the signature of Cantillon's products.


The fourth barrel we tasted from contained a one year old lambic.  What 
was unique about this barrel was that this was the first batch in it since 
it was bought by the brewery.  Previously this barrel had contained port.  
The lambic was, of what we tasted from the barrels, most identifiable as a 
Cantillon product.  Its acidity was very much in evidence and it had a 
complexity that wasn't as obviously present in the other barrels.  The 
taste also showed the presence of a grape tannin influence as well as a 
mild but evident port taste.  The color was much darker than the very 
light straw colors of the other barrel samples.


With the barrel tasting concluded we where invited into the brewery's 
tasting area to try some of the bottled products.  It was here that a 
rather long tasting was accompanied by the opportunity to have a 
detailed discussion with Jean Pierre Van Roy.


One of the first things I realized upon entering the tasting area was 
what was done with leaking barrels.  Since Cantillon does not have 
access to a cooper, the leaking barrels are taken out of service and 
eventually cut up and used in the wood stoves that heat the tasting 
area.  Had I been thinking I would have arranged to ship some old 
barrels to a cooper in Napa, California, not far from where I live, but 
this would probably have been less than ideal when I received the 
shipping and repair bills.


The Cantillon brewery regularly produces a gueuze, kriek, and a 
framboise called Rose de Gambrinus.  In addition to this line of 
products there are also special beers which are produced from time to 
time.  One of the specialty beers produce in the past include a gueuze 
with some very port-like character as a result of fermentation in 
barrels previously use for port.  Another very rare specialty that you 
will not likely see outside of the brewery is a lambic which was 
fermented with St. Emillion grapes.  Only two barrels of this was made.


The first two bottled beers we tasted where krieks.  One was made 
exclusively with Shaarbeek cherries while the other was a blend of 
different cherries.  Both where excellent in their own right, but 
tasting these side by side really helped identify the characteristic 
flavor of the Shaarbeek cherry.  The flavor was very strong and I found 
it to be quite tart and astringent.  It was unlike any other cherry I 
have tasted.  With any other cherry I don't believe the intensity of the 
flavor could be duplicated, even with a much larger quantity of fruit.


In making these krieks, 150kg of cherries are used per pipe.  The 
cherries arrive fresh from the orchard and are held at 2-3C until they 
have enough for a pipe.  The cherries need to be added quickly since 
they will begin to rot otherwise.


The next two beers we tasted where of great interest to everyone.  We 
sampled a bottle of Cantillon framboise side by side with a framboise I 
had bottled in 1994.  My framboise was made using as close to 
traditional techniques as possible, with the only major change being the 
use of pure cultures.  While there was certainly no doubt as to which 
was superior, the reaction to my pure culture framboise was very 
positive.  It was obviously within the realm of the style even with the 
flaws it showed.  Rob did a very good job summarizing this part of the 
tasting and I have taken the liberty of including that summary here.


I have a preference here, that is neither instructive or in obvious. 
Firstly, J-P liked it. There is a political reason why he should even 
give a beer from so far from Payottenland a chance, but he also had 
comments and questions. His first and continual question was "is it 
spontaneously fermented?". We covered the logistical difficulties, as 
well as the natural advantages he has. His comments on our attempts (and 
Mike's framboise) were very positive. His major negative comment was the 
tannin. This he attributed to too much fruit. The rational being that 
the pips would add the tannin. In retrospect it is most likely the 
barrel Mike was using. I personally felt there was a presence in the 
nose and mouth of what I can only describe as "Strawberry pit". This had 
the effect of cutting the flavour development short. Just as the flavour 
was beginning to develop in the mouth, it stopped.


The next beer we tasted was a very unique experiment with St. Emillion 
grapes.  50Kg of these grapes where added to 175 liters of lambic in two 
barrels.  The result of this unique combination when cold, was very much 
like the standard Cantillon.  As it warmed slowly it became more and 
more wine like with the flavor and aroma from the grapes slowly 
increasing until it balanced and eventually slightly dominated.  Only 
two barrels of this where made as a joint experiment between Cantillon 
and a winery in France.  After this was bottled the barrels where burned 
to avoid the possibility of contaminating the winery.


The final beer was even more of a surprise.  We where asked what the 
oldest lambic was that we had tasted.  At the time the oldest we had 
tasted was a bottle of 1983 Boon Mariage Parfait kriek.  After that one 
question Jean Pierre disappeared.  While Sheri, Rob and I wondered what 
was to happen next, Jean Pierre was apparently in the cellar looking for 
something special.  He returned with a bottle of seventeen year old 
gueuze -- a 1977 bottling.  This was a surprisingly well carbonated beer 
for its age.  Upon pouring it had a very dense, almost creamy, white 
head which did not dissipate as quickly as many other younger gueuze 
I've had.  The palate was definitely of Cantillon origin, but the 
acidity had softened and the flavors blended together even more.  This 
was certainly a superior product.  Unfortunately I find it difficult to 
capture the essence of its differences between this and its younger 
relatives.


During this tasting there was a continual conversion, as well as 
reference to a French/English dictionary.  It was then that I obtained 
the mash schedule presented earlier.  There was also a discussion of how 
to ensure good bottle carbonation.  We where told that for a gueuze they 
use a mix of 70% old lambic with 30% young lambic and that they have 90% 
attenuation in order to properly condition and carbonate the finished 
gueuze.


Our conversion also drifted to many unexpected topics.  In discussing 't 
Spinnekopke, a very popular restaurant which Cantillon supplies, we soon 
found ourselves with a reservation for that evening booked in the name 
of brewery by Jean Pierre's wife Claude.  I have little doubt that we 
would not have been able to get in had Claude not made the reservation 
for us.  Dinner at 't Spinnekopke was an event suitable for a short 
article of its own.


This was an extremely enjoyable and informative afternoon.  I feel 
honored to have been able to spend so much time talking with Jean 
Pierre, Claude, Jean and the rest of the Van Roy family.  Also, I would 
like to thank Yvan de Baets, a student of Louvain-la-neuve and a friend 
of the Van Roy's, for acting as interpreter when necessary.  Through his 
efforts the discussion was a lot more productive than it would have been 
otherwise.




Cantillon products are imported to the U.S. by World Wide Imports of
Deale, MD.  World Wide Imports distributes these products in the 
Washington D.C, Maryland, and Boston markets.


------------------------------




End of Lambic Digest
************************
-------