Return-Path: postmaster at lance.colostate.edu
Received: from srvr8.engin.umich.edu (root at srvr8.engin.umich.edu [141.212.2.81]) by srvr5.engin.umich.edu (8.6.12/8.6.4) with ESMTP id EAA26909 for <spencer at srvr5.engin.umich.edu>; Tue, 14 Nov 1995 04:34:30 -0500
Received: from twins.rs.itd.umich.edu (twins.rs.itd.umich.edu [141.211.83.39]) by srvr8.engin.umich.edu (8.6.12/8.6.4) with ESMTP id EAA07063 for <spencer at engin.umich.edu>; Tue, 14 Nov 1995 04:36:22 -0500
Received: by twins.rs.itd.umich.edu (8.7.1/2.2)
        with X.500 id EAA26669; Tue, 14 Nov 1995 04:36:21 -0500 (EST)
Received: from longs.lance.colostate.edu by twins.rs.itd.umich.edu (8.7.1/2.2)
        with SMTP id EAA26655; Tue, 14 Nov 1995 04:36:19 -0500 (EST)
Received: (daemon at localhost) by longs.lance.colostate.edu (8.6.12/8.6.5a (LANCE Revision: 1.3)) id AAA18843 for reallambic at longs.lance.colostate.edu; Tue, 14 Nov 1995 00:30:07 -0700
Date: Tue, 14 Nov 1995 00:30:07 -0700
Message-Id: <199511140730.AAA18843 at longs.lance.colostate.edu>
From: lambic-request at lance.colostate.edu (subscription requests only - do not post here)
To: lambic at lance.colostate.edu
Reply-to: lambic at lance.colostate.edu (postings only - do not send subscription requests here)
Errors-to: lambic-request at lance.colostate.edu
Subject: Lambic Digest #727 (November 14, 1995)






Lambic Digest #727                             Tue 14 November 1995




        Forum on Lambic Beers (and other Belgian beer styles)
                Mike Sharp, Digest Coordinator




Contents:
  Lambic Digest #726 (November 11, 1995) -R ("Coben, Craig B.")
  Belgian beer-bike tour report (long) (Edward E Harstead)




Send article submissions only to: lambic at longs.lance.colostate.edu
Send all other administrative requests (subscribe/unsubscribe/change) to:
     lambic-request at longs.lance.colostate.edu
Note that the request address is not an automated server.  It forwards
to a real person who may not be able to process the request immediately.
Subscription changes often take 2-5 days, sometimes more.
 
Back issues are available by mail; send empty message with subject 'HELP' to:
     netlib at longs.lance.colostate.edu
Phil Seitz' series on Brewing Belgian Beer is available; the index
     from the archives lists individual topics and the complete set.
     Start with the help message above then request the index.
A FAQ is also available by netlib; say 'send faq from lambic' as the
     subject or body of your message (to netlib at longs.lance.colostate.edu).


----------------------------------------------------------------------


Date: Mon, 13 Nov 95 09:19 EST
From: "Coben, Craig B." <COBENCB+aLONDON%Sullivan_&_Cromwell-NY at mcimail.com>
Subject: Lambic Digest #726 (November 11, 1995) -R


Daniel --


I found Rochefort in a Belgian restaurant called (I think) Aux
Douceurs Belges in the Charlevoix region east of Quebec City.


The restaurant is listed in my Quebec guidebook; unfortunately,
I'm in the process of moving from New York to London, UK and my
stuff is at this moment being shipped.  Please remind me in about
2 weeks and I'll find the exact name and address of restaurant,
as well as the city in which it is located. My e-mail address is
742-7255 at MCIMail.com.


I noticed that you are from Montreal. Have you checked out the
beer bar Futenbulles (located on rue Bernard near Av. du Parc)?
You might find Rochefort there -- helas, despite (or due to)
having spent much time there, I can't remember if Futenbulles
offered Rochefort or not.


Bonne chance,
Craig




------------------------------


Date: Mon, 13 Nov 1995 12:22:12 +0500
From: bohack at harpo.wh.att.com (Edward E Harstead)
Subject: Belgian beer-bike tour report (long)




Attached below is a slightly edited version of a report on a beer-
bike tour of Belgium that I had sent out to some friends.  I hope
some may find it interesting.  Sorry for the length.
    --------------------------------------------------


INTRODUCTION.


Somewhere over the dark Atlantic, at 30,000 feet, the Sabena
stewardess asked me if I'd like a drink.  I inquired as to the beer
selection, with muted expectations.  The answer was Stella Artois
and Alken Maes pilsners.  And this the Belgian national airline.  I
stoically resigned myself to the tomato juice and a short
postponement of drinking great Belgian beer.


This beer report describes my trip to Belgium this past September.
Part 1 covers a six day solo beer-bike tour of the Brabant and East
Flanders provinces.  Part 2 sums up the following five days in
Brussels, during which I attended the European Conference on
Optical Communications, but still managed to do quite a bit of Beer
Research.




PART 1: LINEAR NARRATIVE OF BRABANT AND EAST FLANDERS BIKE TOUR.


Typical of Lowland arrivals, I landed in Brussels at a dim early
hour, skies overcast and raining.  But this time was different;
images of commencing a bike tour in the rain, jet-lagged after a
red-eye flight, had to be countered with deliberate equanimity. 


At the airport I retrieved my suitcase and boxed bicycle,
transported them via train to Brussels Gare Centrale, detrained,
and dragged them to the baggage room.  There I spread out the tools
and parts, reassembled the bike, mounted and loaded the front and
aft panniers, and checked the empty box and suitcase.  By the time
I was ready to hit the road, the rain had stopped, but the
temperature was quite cool-- I had landed into full-blown autumn;
all pedestrians wearing coats.


Following my compass to the west, I found my way out of the city to
the lambic-brewing Payottenland.  At Wambeek I stopped at the De
Troch brewery, once known for its excellent traditional lambics,
now notorious for its astounding assortment of fruit-flavored
beers, marketed under the Chapeau brand name.  These are the people
who brought us banana and pineapple lambics.  I was greeted by the
brewmaster's wife, Mrs. Raes, who led me through a peremptory tour
of the lambic brewing equipment, all very old and traditional,
spiderwebs and everything.  But out in the courtyard, you can't
miss the mountains of fruit juice cases.


In the visitor's tasting room, I was generously served the rarely
found, traditional De Troch gueuze.  It was abruptly fabulous.
While sipping this extraordinary drink, I examined their product
line display, whose recent additions include apricot and mirabelle
plum beers, both juice-diluted to a paltry 3% ABV.  Through the
window I saw the crates of juice in the courtyard.  All this while
enjoying one of the best gueuzes of my life.  A David Lynchian
moment, I wasn't sure if I was in heaven or hell.


Mrs. Raes explained that there is just not much demand for the
"sour" beer, maybe 1%.  She suggested that it might be a fashion,
implying that if demand for traditional lambics improved, they
would distribute it more widely.  It's not easy to argue with such
cold-blooded business logic, and I didn't try.  The masses get what
they deserve, right?  At any rate, a special batch of the
traditional gueuze and kriek will allegedly be shipped to the
U.S. this month (November).


The next day, like all to come, were cool and dry.  I cycled by
workers harvesting hops, past the non-brewing Affligem abbey, and
along the occasionally scenic Scheldt River to the city of Gent.
There I slept cheaply for two nights-- in a Youth Hostel, the first
time since 1982.


The third day I putted around Greater Gent, eventually stopping at
the wonderful farmhouse-beer-cafe Schipperhuis before urban
re-entry.  Attired in lycra, I sat by a window, the evening sun
slanting across my table and illuminating my plate of assorted
smoked North Sea fish and my glass of the exquisite 9% ABV Het
Kapittel Prior Tripel.  Satisfaction complete.  Then, after
additional consumption of equally exquisite Gentse Tripel and
Westvletern 8 (both 8% ABV), I remounted my bike, headlamp
attached, and carefully rode into the sunset.  


Arriving in Gent after dark, I visited some beer cafes, including
the Hop Duvel, where instead of running a tab the waitress said
that I must "pay instantly".  I splurged on the 1973 vintage of the
now extinct traditional gueuze from De Keersmaeker (makers of Mort
Subite).  The oldest beer I have ever tasted, it was good but not 
remarkable.  Serendipitously, in the background, was the equally
venerable hit from Mouth & McNeil, "How Do You Do".


On the fourth day I headed south to the "Flemish Ardennes".  En
route, during a routine beer stop, I discovered the cidery and
burnt Pater Lieven ale from the Van Den Bossche brewery in nearby
Sint-Lievens-Esse.  Intrigued, I rode there and found the >100 year
old brewery right on the main square.  Without notice, the owner
and brewmaster, Mr. Van Den Bossche, gave me a wonderful personal
tour, showing me work-in-progress, telling me old stories and
future plans.  I'm not sure if it is that he is so nice to
everyone, or maybe it was the novelty of a bike-helmeted American.


On the penultimate day of my bike tour, I headed back east for the
Payottenland, and in the afternoon checked into the Centrum Hotel
du Centre in the center of the town of Beersel.  I immediately
commenced a lambic-cafe walking tour, culminating in dinner at the
large and lively Cafe Drie Fonteinen, the lambic blendpub/
restaurant.  The gueuze is quite nice and manageably sour, but I
still cannot handle the intense acidity of the bottled kriek.  Here
and now I confess to world: I added one of the sugar cubes that are
served with the kriek.  In a small way I compensated while ordering
dessert, impressing the waitress with the great Dutch word for
whipped cream: "slagroom".


The following morning I had an appointment at the small,
traditional Hanssens gueuze stekerij (blending and ageing only-- no
brewing).  I met with Mr. Hanssen and his son-in-law (who also
helped as translator).  While touring the premises, we tapped some
1 year old lambic from a barrel (flat and sour).  Later we drank
some gueuze-- Hanssens gueuze is my personal favorite.  We talked,
and I learned that Hanssen's grandfather started a brewery there
about 100 years ago, but during WWII the Germans took away all the
copper equipment.  After the war, it was decided not to purchase
replacements, and brewing was abandoned.  Wort, purchased from the
outside, is aged and blended here.  Today he buys from Van den
Stock (Bellevue).  The future of the blendery is uncertain.
Hanssen advised his son against taking it over, since "not much of
a life can be made from the business".  In the meantime, the
son-in-law expects that Hanssen will stick with it until the end
since it is his life's work.  


I then biked north to Brussels, my center of gravity closer to the
ground with 7.5 liters of Hanssens, Drie Fonteinen, De Koninck, and
Oud Beersel gueuze and kriek in my panniers.




PART 2: EXECUTIVE SUMMARY OF STAY IN BRUSSELS.


With the indispensable CAMRA-Brussels' "A selective guide to
Brussels bars", I was very busy.  By day I got my fill of talks
about 10 Gb/s optical devices and wavelength division multiplexed
networks, but at night I marched troops of colleagues to various 
beer destinations.  Highlights include the friendly and
unpretentious Cafe Les Brassins, serving good food and De Neve
(black label) gueuze; the tiny and comfortable Cafe Estaminet Le
Zageman, serving Wets gueuze; and the restaurant L'Etoile d'Or dit
le "Rotte Planchei", whose waiter was happy to explain the menu at
length to four monolingual Americans, and where every course that
each of us ordered was delicious-- the best food I've had in
Belgium.  One night I led an expedition to the suburban restaurant
De Heeren van Liedekercke for a great meal and perhaps the best
beer list I have ever seen.  Every gueuze is here.  Every single
one.  Including the strong-tasting but easy-drinking Lindemans
traditional gueuze, allegedly available no where but here.  It's a
modern family-run place, and we chatted with the young chef, who
expressed an interest in coming to cook in America.


During lunch break one day I stopped by the Cantillon brewery to
say "hi".  I asked Mrs. van Roy how the U.S. export business was
doing, and she replied that it was no more, and that they hadn't
shipped anything since last year!  (Since my return, my brother and
I have cleaned out two N.J. retailers of Cantillon, probably enough
to last us through 1997.) 




CONCLUSION


Of course I have hit the highlights in this report.  The lowlights
included trips to closed cafes, truly bad schlock music in the
cafes outside Brussels (in the center of Halle it was even piped
into the streets!), and a very long and verbose group tour of the
Oud Beersel brewery, conducted in Flemish.  But I can highly
recommend beer-bike touring in the Lowland countries, which excel
in bike riding infrastructure and the density of beer
destinations.  Also, beer and cycling naturally complement each
other, particularly in cool weather (warning: last year in
Nederland I was careless and got a touch of heat exhaustion on a
hot, dry day).


Some beer tour statistics:  In 11 days, I consumed 65 beers, mostly
lambic and Trappist, nearly every one a beer that is not available
in the U.S.  Lambic highlights include draft lambics: De Neve and
Girardin; and artisanal gueuzes: Boon, De Keersmaeker 1973,
Cantillon Hop Duvel recipe, De Koninck, 3 Fonteinen, De Troch,
Hanssens, Oud Beersel, Vander Linden, Girardin, Cantillon, Wets,
Timmermans Caveau, De Neve black label, the original Moriau (8
years old), and the artisanal gueuzes from Bellevue, St. Louis, and
Lindemans.  I returned to the U.S. with 29 bottles containing 13
liters of beer packed into my checked and carry-on luggage, which
must last until the next time.


Ed Harstead
e.e.harstead at att.com
tel: 201 386-4837
fax: 201 386-3083




------------------------------




End of Lambic Digest
************************
-------