Subject: Misc. Followup
Date: Thu, 13 Jan 94 01:02:18 EST
From: nr706@aol.com


Some followup:


tak@tazboy.Jpl.Nasa.Gov (Tom Kreitzberg) responded to my note about other
fruit juice bases for cider-type beverages ...
>I'd guess you could make an orangecider in much the same way as apple cider,
but expect the shelf life to be very short -- at least that's the case for
citrus wines.


Why should their life be short? Wouldn't the acidity discourage the growth of
nasties?


Greg Appleyard <gappleya@uoguelph.ca> asks ...
>I am curious about filtering equipment and ...  Alternatives to filtering?


I just bottled a 5 gal. batch of cider which looks much clearer than either
of the other two batches I'd made to date. After secondary fermentation was
down to just about nothing, I added about 1/4 tsp grape tannin, then 1 tsp.
gelatin dissolved in a little hot water. After four days, the gelatin had
caught all the stuff that made other batches a bit cloudy, and settled out.
The end product appeared amazingly
 clear, and the cost, needless to say, was negligible.


------------------------------


Date: 13 Jan 94 01:29:03 EST
From: "Kevin M. Watts" <75250.2033@CompuServe.COM>
Subject: Cider Recipe


Just bottled a cider (actually, a cyser) I began in early October. It tastes
great, so I thought I'd post the recipe:


KEVIN'S STRONG CIDER


5 gallons sweet cider
6 lbs. Mesquite honey (from St. Pats Brew supply, Texas)
1 tsp. yeast extract
Pasteur Eperney dry yeast
American ale yeast slurry


Heated honey and 1/2 gallon cider until almost boiling. Held temp for 1/2 hour
to sterilize honey. Added yeast extract. Cooled and added to 4 1/2 gallons sweet
cider in plastic fermenter. Pitched yeast. 


Racked to glass secondary after 1 month. Cider cleared on its own after two
months. Bottled when fermentation ceased, almost 3 months. Bottled without
priming. SG 1.090. Finishing grav: .998. 


I thought the combination of Epernay and ale yeast would give a fruitier taste,
and it seemed to work. The taste is dry and quite strong, with a good apple
taste. Fermentatation in a closed fermenter must have aided in retaining the
"appley" taste so often lost in cider fermentation.


I now definitely believe in a "hands off" approach to cider making. I only
racked this sucker once, and that appeals to my essentially lazy nature! And,
adding sulfites seems unnecessary when you pitch enough yeast.


                             -Kevin/Chicago




------------------------------