Subject: Cider was clear, then got cloudy
Date: Fri, 18 Nov 94 09:27:42 EST
From: stavej@westford.ccur.com


One batch of cider is behaving in an odd way.  It
cleared (still fermenting a tiny bit), then got a
little cloudy and the fermentation picked up a little.
A batch I started a week after this one is clear and
still fermenting a little bit, but not as much as the
first one (which started with a lower gravity).


So, does anyone know what this is?  Could the ferment
have stuck a little, then restarted itself?  Could it
be a malo-lactic ferment that kicked in after the
initial ferment?  It seems to taste OK, but I'd like
to understand what is going on.  Any suggestions would
be welcome.


Joel Stave
stavej@westford.ccur.com


------------------------------


Date: Fri, 18 Nov 1994 11:58:02 -0600 (CST)
From: gellym@aviion.persoft.com (brewing chemist Mitch)
Subject: sulpher and dumping reccomendation


I'm sorry, I do not remember the original poster who was concerned with his
cider taking on sulpher / rotten egg aromas (I have it here somewhere), but I
sent him personal e-mail telling him pretty much what everyone else did: that
this was a phase that the cider would pass through.


In CD 501, "Donald Hanson" <dlh2@cornell.edu> advises:


> Your cider is going to taste like rotten eggs too!  Dump = recommendation!


Which is the reason I am posting now. Donald, have you had personal 
experiences that you could relate to this, or is this your speculation?


I told the original poster that I have experienced the same situation with 
some of my wild ciders, and it has always passed. I would wait.


No one ever told me about the intense rotten egg/sulpher smell that I would
experience the first time I brewed a lager beer with the Munich lager yeast
(308). I thought my batch was sunk. I mean, it really reeked. It was not till
I told a brewing buddy that I was contemplating scrapping the whole thing 
that he told me that it was a normal phase of the fermentation and would 
pass. Indeed it did, and was one of the best Vienna lagers I have ever 
brewed.


So hang in there. Let it sit. Chances are that this will move on.


Cheers,


Mitch


- -- 
|                       - Mitch Gelly -                        | Zack Norman |
|software QA specialist, unix systems administrator, zymurgist,|     is      |
| AHA/HWBTA beer judge, & president of the Madison Homebrewers |  Sammy in   |
|      - gellym@aviion.persoft.com - gelly@persoft.com -       | Chief Zabu  |


------------------------------


Date: Fri, 18 Nov 1994 13:31:38 -0500
From: dg748@cleveland.Freenet.Edu (Sam J. Arendec)
Subject: Cider Activity


I am about to embark on my first attempt at cider making.  I of
course have a question being a beginner.  I have 4 gals of 
cider that was farm pressed last week that has been in the 
refridgerator.  I was hoping to begin work on the product this 
weekend, that is heat it to 150 deg for about 15 min let it cool 
to 98-100 deg and then pitch some Red Star Champagne Yeast and 
wait for fermentation to stop.


But wait, the 4 gal jugs in the fridge over the course of the 
week have begun to expand.  I released the pressure and observed
a lot of activity going on.  I am assuming the wild yeast is 
going to town.


Should I let it go its course or should I continue with the 
original plan of cooking out any bacteria and using the Red Star?


I have been hanging out with a bunch of beer/wine/mead/cyser
types who haven't done much with straight ciders so I am posting
here.


Thanks for your help.


------------------------------