Subject: Cider Digest #506, 8 December 1994
From: cider-request@eklektix.com




Cider Digest #506                                         8 December 1994


                 Forum for Discussion of Cider Issues
                      Dick Dunn, Digest Janitor


Contents:
  English Cider Apples in the U.S. (Peter R. Hoover)
  Cider apple trees (Greg Appleyard)
  Re: English cider-apple varieties in the US (fickle climate)? (wegeng.xkeys@xe
rox.com)
  English Cider Apples (John Ross)
  carbonation (IO11262@MAINE.maine.edu)
  Re: Cider Digest #505, 5 December 1994 (NR706@aol.com)


Send ONLY articles for the digest to cider@eklektix.com.
Use cider-request@eklektix.com for subscribe/unsubscribe/admin requests.
    When subscribing, please include your name and a good address in the
    message body unless you're sure your mailer generates them.


------------------------------


Subject: English Cider Apples in the U.S.
From: prh4@cornell.edu (Peter R. Hoover)
Date: Tue, 6 Dec 1994 08:40:53 -0500




Dick Dunn writes:


>Has anyone tried growing any of the traditional English cider apple varieties
>in places the US where there are severe winters?  I'm mainly interested in
>the bitter varieties that aren't normally found here.


Dick,


Try contacting the:


New York State Fruit Testing Cooperative Association, Inc.
Post Office Box 462
Geneva, NY 14456
Telephone: 315 787-2205
Fax: 315 787-2216


They are a non-profit fruit nursery associated with the New York State
Agricultural Experiement Station in Geneva, NY. They have a catalog that
includes all sorts of fruits adaptable to harsh winters, which includes (on
p. 7 of the 1995 catalog) the following "antique apples":


Baldwin
Cox Orange Pippin
Fameuse (Snow)
Golden Russet
Gravenstein
Rhode Island Greening
Roxbury Russet
Spitzenberg


I think you have to be a member of the association ($10.00/year) to order.


Peter Hoover
prh4@cornell.edu


------------------------------


Subject: Cider apple trees
From: Greg Appleyard <gappleya@uoguelph.ca>
Date: Tue, 6 Dec 1994 10:01:03 -0400 (EDT)


Dick Dunn asked about English cider apples and weather (pun) they could 
be grown in North America. To my knowledge, apple trees can be grown in 
just about any sheltered location, with the right soil type. For best 
results however, meaning a resonable crop, requires a mild climate. Apple 
trees grow all over Southern Ontario (where I live) which is farther 
north than Boulder CO, but they grow best here in sheltered microclimates 
near the great lakes. Information on apples here says that blooming dates 
range from the 10th to the 20th of May. If your area can be frost free 
for the blooming date then I think the apples should grow there. I dont 
know what the climate type is in Boulder but around here it is described 
as 5b to 7a (hardiness scale) and apples grow well here. I suggest you 
find out from a nursery what your climate type is and then find out if 
the trees you want can grow there.
 
Dick, do you have the information about which suppliers are willing to 
sell english cider apples and would you mind posting their names and 
addresses either to the list or to me by email. I am also interested in 
growing a tree or two to support my cider habit. Thanks.


Greg


------------------------------


Subject: Re: English cider-apple varieties in the US (fickle climate)?
From: wegeng.xkeys@xerox.com
Date:   Tue, 6 Dec 1994 08:03:14 PST


Our new list moderator asks asks:
>Has anyone tried growing any of the traditional English cider apple varieties
>in places the US where there are severe winters?


I`m told that the NY State Agricultural Experimental Station grows many English
cider varieties (they grow something like 1000 apple varieties in all).  Geneva
is about 45 minutes east of Rochester.  I suggest talking to someone there
about how tolerant the English varieties are to your specific climate.


You can learn more about the NYSAES by connecting to their WWW server:


        http://aruba.nysaes.cornell.edu:8000


They also may be able to help you find a reliable source for trees.


/Don


------------------------------


Subject: English Cider Apples
From: johnross@halcyon.com (John Ross)
Date: Tue, 6 Dec 1994 08:24:13 -0800


>Has anyone tried growing any of the traditional English cider apple varieties
>in places the US where there are severe winters?  I'm mainly interested in
>the bitter varieties that aren't normally found here.


The winters aren't what you'd call severe, but the Washington State
University Research Center in Mount Vernon, Washington, in the Skagit River
Valley (west of the Cascade Range and a few miles from the shore of Puget
Sound), and Oregon State University in the Wilamette and Rogue River valleys
(also west of the Cascade Range) are growing English and French cider
varieties, as are a very small number of private orchards (none, alas are
selling their fruit). 


I would suggest you get in touch with Gary Moulton at Mount Vernon, and ask
for his advice about which varieties would work in your climate. He's not on
the Net, but you can reach him at this address:


     Gary Moulton
     Washington State University
     Mount Vernon Research Unit
     1468 Memorial Highway
     Mount Vernon, Washington  98273


It would probably be worth your time to talk to your County Extension Agent
and ask if anybody in Colorado is doing any work with apples. If you're
willing to work with them, they might even give you the genetic stock.


If you want to do your own grafting, you can probably get scionwood from
Mount Vernon, but I'd consult with Gary about hardiness before choosing
varieties. Last year, WSU sold scionwood by mail, and I assume the will do
so again this winter. Last year's list included these cider varieties:


     Anere de Berthcourt
     Bellflower
     Brown's Apple
     Bulmer's Norman
     Chisel Jersey
     Cow Jersey
     Geeveston Fanny
     Harry Master's Jersey
     Merton Russet
     Marachel
     Michelin
     Muscat de Berney
     Muscat de Lense
     Pomme Gris
     Reine des Pommes
     Sweet Coppin     


------------------------------


Subject: carbonation
From: IO11262@MAINE.maine.edu
Date:    Tue, 06 Dec 94 13:28:28 EST


I have just bottled a batch of cider and I was wondering how to make it
sparkling AND sweet.  I used a fairly hardy yeast so letting the yeast
wimp out at higher alcohol levels is out of the question.  I have heard
of carbonating the cider with a little sugar and when it is carbonated
to taste, boil to kill the yeast and sugar to taste.  Won't this process
remove all of the carbonation, or explode the bottles?
  Another method is to add camden tablets or sorbistat to kill the yeast
but this is difficult to do to a number of 12 oz. bottles.
  BTW the cider was made with 1 gal fresh pressed cider (I don't know
which blend of apples were used), 1/2c maple syrup, Red Star premier
cuvee yeast.  It tastes good when sweetened but it is a little sour
straight.  I am hoping that time will remove the sourness.


------------------------------


Subject: Re: Cider Digest #505, 5 December 1994
From: NR706@aol.com
Date: Wed, 7 Dec 1994 11:11:23 -0500


>From: Jason Landman <jasonl@america.net>
>Is it too late to find any "unpreserved" cider anywhere?  I'm thinking 
>about the farmer's market....
>
>If anyone has any ideas, let me know.  Thanks!


Health food stores are great sources for preservative-free cider. Often they
freeze it, so they have reasonably "fresh" supplies all year 'round. As far
as I can tell, the freezing doesn't seem to hurt for cider-making purposes.


Tom


------------------------------


End of Cider Digest #506