Subject: Cider Digest #1471, 20 October 2008
From: cider-request@talisman.com




Cider Digest #1471                                         20 October 2008


                 Forum for Discussion of Cider Issues
                      Dick Dunn, Digest Janitor


Contents:
  December Cider Making Class ("Drew Zimmerman")
  Question ("Walter Phelps")
  4th Annual Great Lakes Internatioanl Cider & Perry Competition ("Gary Awdey")


Send ONLY articles for the digest to cider@talisman.com.
Use cider-request@talisman.com for subscribe/unsubscribe/admin requests.
    When subscribing, please include your name and a good address in the
    message body unless you're sure your mailer generates them.
Archives of the Digest are available at www.talisman.com/cider
----------------------------------------------------------------------


Subject: December Cider Making Class
From: "Drew Zimmerman" <drewzimmer@comcast.net>
Date: Tue, 14 Oct 2008 19:20:38 -0700


This should have gone out a month ago when Ian Merwin posted the Cornell
announcement. The WSU Learning Center and Mount Vernon Research and
Extension Center in conjunction with the Northwest Cider Society are
offering Peter Mitchell's Cider Production: Science and Techology & quality
Control course December 8-12.  This is the follow on course to Principles
and Practice and is applicable to those who are thinking about commercial
cider production or are already cider producers.  For detailed info see
http://learningcenters.wsu.edu/skagit/cider.html


If you are interested, we need a commitment from you by Oct. 24th or the
class will be cancelled.  Again, I apologize for the late notice.


Drew Zimmerman


------------------------------


Subject: Question
From: "Walter Phelps" <walter6353@verizon.net>
Date: Wed, 15 Oct 2008 09:26:47 -0400


We make a few barrels of cider each year, and this year the empty wood
barrels have acquired a slight vinegar odor. I've rinsed them and plan to
burn a sulphur strip inside of each. Is this adequate protection against
the vinegar bacteria?
Thank you.
                               Walter


------------------------------


Subject: 4th Annual Great Lakes Internatioanl Cider & Perry Competition
From: "Gary Awdey" <gawdey@att.net>
Date: Fri, 17 Oct 2008 07:29:40 -0400


The Great Lakes Cider & Perry Association is proud to announce the return of
the Great Lakes Old World Syder Competition (GLOWS) under a new name, the
Great Lakes International Cider & Perry Competition (GLINTCAP for those who
favor the convenience of an acronym).  This unique competition has divisions
for both commercial and noncommercial producers and is open to ciders,
perries, meads, beers, and commercial distillates, provided they are made
with apples or pears.  This highly inclusive competition has nineteen
categories of entry.  For traditionalists this competition includes a
category for Standard Cider & Perry (with five subcategories). The Standard
category has a requirement that the entry be produced from a minimum of 85%
juice, not include both sugar and water (or sugar syrup and water) in the
list of ingredients, and not have added flavor.  The Association reserves
the unrestricted right to submit commercial entries in this category to
testing to verify conformity to requirements.


The applicable BJCP categories:
20. FRUIT BEER. Restricted to beers made with either apples or pears only.


23. SPECIALTY BEER. Restricted to beers made with either apples or pears only.


25A. CYSER (Apple Melomel). Apple Juice and honey-no other ingredients.


25C. OTHER FRUIT MELOMEL. (PEAR) Pear Juice or blend with pear juice and no
other ingredients.


26C. OPEN CATEGORY MEAD (must contain apple or pear)


27. STANDARD CIDER AND PERRY


    27A. Common Cider


    27B. English Cider


    27C. French Cider


    27D. Common Perry


    27E. Traditional Perry


28. SPECIALTY CIDER AND PERRY


    28A. New England Cider


    28B. Fruit Cider


    28C. Applewine


    28D. Other Specialty Cider/Perry


Additional categories not recognized by the BJCP:


2006-1 Macro Cider or Perry


2006-2 Intensified Cider or Perry


    A. Prefermentation (Ice Cider) (Open to commercial and noncommercial
divisions)


    B. Postfermentation (Pommeau) (Open to commerical division only)


2006-3 Distilled (Open to commercial division only)


    A. Eau de vie


    B. Brandy (Oak Aged)


Judging for the competition will take place at Schmohz Brewing Company in
Grand Rapids, Michigan, on Sunday, December 7, 2008.  As has become the
custom, there will be a training seminar for judges the evening before the
judging.  This is free to competition staff, including judges and stewards.
Any space available will be offered first come first reserved for a nominal
fee of $15.00 to anyone else wishing to participate and benefit from this
opportunity.  Stewarding for the event will be provided with the generous
support of the Prime Time Brewers.
If you would like to participate in the judging, you must contact
competition organizer Rex Halfpenny (mibeerguyd@aol.com) and provide the
following information.


- -Name and contact information


- -Commercial producer affiliation if any


- -Judging experience; novice, experienced, advanced, BJCP rank (if
applicable).  (By custom new judges are teamed up with experienced and
advanced judges).


- -Style categories best qualified to judge


- -Style categories entered (judges will not evaluate their own products)


If you would like to send entries to this BJCP-sanctioned competition they
will be accepted beginning Tuesday, November 18, 2008 through Tuesday,
December 2, 2008.


Each entry must include an entry form attached to the bottle with a rubber
band and the appropriate entry free. Noncommerical entries are $10 for the
first entry, $7 for the second, and $5 for each subsequent entry.
Commercial entries are $50 per entry ($35 for members of the Great Lakes
Cider & Perry Association).  To encourage international participation the
entry fee will be waived this year for entries produced and shipped from
outside North America, though entrants are still responsible for paying
their own shipping and duty costs. Each entry must include a minimum of 24
ounces (or 750ml, i.e. two 12- ounce bottles). It is suggested that at least
two containers are entered (regardless of size). This gives the judges the
freshest opportunity to sample your product(s) should it be elevated to the
second round Best of Show (BOS) judging. The second bottle may also be used
by first round judges should they perceive a problem with the contents of
the first bottle.


To aid in maintaining fairness of blind judging commercial entries will be
poured out of sight of judges and identified by a randomly assigned
identification number. Noncommercial entries will be poured at judging
tables and must be sent in bottles free of permanent labels or markings.


For the full entry packet please email Rex Halfpenny (mibeerguyd@aol.com) or
me (gawdey@att.net).


Gary Awdey             Eden, New York


------------------------------


End of Cider Digest #1471
*************************