Subject: First cider discouraging.  Should I try a second?
Date: 25 Jan 1993 08:58:24 -0600 (MDT)
From: MARK TARATOOT <SLNDW@CC.USU.EDU>


Greetings.


I just bottled my first cider this weekend, and I must say it
is not what I thought.  I started a little over 2 months ago
with fresh cider from our neighborhood.  I added campden tablets and
a bit of yeast nutrient.  I used Epernay 2 wine yeast.  I sampled the 
cider after a few weeks and it still tasted really yummy.  After 2 months
it was clear and beautiful.  I moved it to a warmer spot, and fermentation
kicked up again.  When it had settled, I moved it back to the cool room
to clear.  I primed it with dextrose and bottled.  Of course I sampled
some, and I was a bit disapointed.  Most of the apple flavor had been
scrubbed/lost during fermentation.  There was a slight musty flavor, and
there was not very much tartness (perhaps I should have added acid
blend?).  I am going to wait a month for this to carbonate/condition
and then try it again (actually, I will probably try it before then) and
I have hopes that it will improve.  It kind of puts me off from trying 
more cider, however.  I like my beer fine, and my pyment (grape
mead) is getting really lovely.  I have tried some comercial ciders
(woodpecker, grants) and love them.  So basicly I am hoping for
encouragement and advice on this batch and the next.


        I am thinking about a cyser for the next batch.  I would
add about 1 pound honey per gallon of cider (5 gals approx).  This
is not enough for a mead, but I figure the cider will make up the 
difference in fermentables.  Is this a reasonable amount of honey?
        I want to get more tartness.  I am considering adding acid
blend and/or juicing some granny smith apples and adding them (just
got a juicer).  How many tart apples do I need to use to increase
the final tartness/apple flavor without overpowering it??
        Is the yeast nutrient necessary?  Yeast grows fine on apples,
but I am thinking in the long time it takes to ferment cider, my
beasties will want more biotin etc. to finish fermentation.
        Regarding yeast... will a low attenuative yeast (such as
European ale) leave me with more residual apple flavor?  Or should
I stick with the slower fermenting wine yeasts to reduce the vigorous
scrubbing action of highly active fermentation?
        Or should I just stick to beer and mead?
Any and all comments will be appreciated!


 -toot
SLNDW@cc.usu.edu




------------------------------