Subject: This batch WILL be better!
Date: 28 Jan 1993 08:42:15 -0600 (MDT)
From: MARK TARATOOT <SLNDW@CC.USU.EDU>


Greetings.


I am going to give my first cider a couple of months in the bottle
and I am sure it will get better.  It already seems to be improving
and I am less disapointed than I was at first.


In the meantime, I am in the process of starting a batch of cyser 
and am in need of a few comments.  The basic recipie is:


~ half a gallon of snowberry honey (5-6 pounds)
4 + gallons fresh cider (mostly macintosh and delicious)
12 oz seneca granny smith apple juice concentrate (no preservatives)
3 tsp acid blend
3+ tsp yeast nutrient
10 campdon tablets


O.G. = 1.082


I have several yeast varieties at my home, and I am wondering which
I should use/start with/finish with/etc.  I have:
        Pastuer Champagne   (red star)
        Montrachet          (red star)
        Epernay 2           (red star)
        Ale                 (williams)
My last cider was made with Epernay 2 and it finished quite dry.  I
would like a sweeter beverage, but I don't know if the ale yeast will
poop out too soon (I want to sparkle some of it).  Also, I don't
know if the ale yeast will ferment more vigorously and scrub some
of the more subtle flavors from the must.  If anyone has information
on the characteristics of the first three yeasts above, I would like
to hear it.


When I rack this, should I increase the sugar (honey) if I go with
one of the wine yeasts??  My first cider started around 1.050.
What about lager yeast?  What are the advantages/disadvantages
in using one type of yeast and adding another at a later time 
(or starting with more than one type)?


How about juicing some other type of apples and tossing that in
at one of the rackings?


I plan on pitching late tonight or more likely tomorrow morning after
the majority of SO2 has been thrown off, so timely comments would be
helpful.




BTW... the Clinton Ale is Delicous!!


Thanks for the help!
 -toot


------------------------------