Subject: Cider and chicken
Date: Mon, 1 Mar 93 21:26:22 EST
From: gkushmer@Jade.Tufts.EDU


Hi all,


I just wanted to let you all in on a recent experiment of mine.  I made
a chicken soup using a bottle of hard cider.  The cider is that by-now
famous Correnty blend from 1992 with epernay yeast.  I had to throw in some
vodka when, after the fermentation was over, some of the blowoff water
got sucked up into the carboy.  


As it goes, nothing seems to have gone wrong with the cider, and I used 
a bottle of it with some chicken soup I made this weekend.  In a 
nutshell, I carved up a half of a pepper, two very small onions, and 
added a couple of cloves of garlic with some oregano, basil, olive oil,
paprika, and even a pinch of nutmeg! 


It all came out very well with the cider.  I think that I went too easy on
the measurements of the spices and next time plan on maybe even adding a 
cheese rind.  The bottom line, though, is that cider and chicken do in
fact mix. 


Before I end this, I just want to say that we should all try making more
cider-oriented foods 'cause I'm sure that there was a time when hard 
cider was the base or an ingredient in a number of recipies.  Now it seems
that you have to go out of your way to find anything with cider (or
beer for that matter) in it.


If anyone has any recipies, please feel free to share them with me!


Cheers,


- --gk




------------------------------


Date: Tue, 2 Mar 93 0:25:06 EST
From: chuck@synchro.com (Chuck Cox)
Subject: Re: Correnty's Magical Blend


Since everyone else is rushing to say how wonderful Paul's effort was
this fall, I'll add my two cents. 


I just tasted my 15 gal batch of cyser made with Paul's cider.  It is
wonderful, and lives up to its name, "Dangerous Cyser".  It is sweet,
potent, and even has a hint of pears.  I'm not sure this stuff will last
long enough to find out how well it ages.  It promises to be superior to
last year's 7 gal batch which didn't last too long. 


Now I just have to move a half-barrel of cyser to my new brewery/garage
without spilling any.  Maybe I should lower the liquid level first,
hmmmmm. 


- -- 
Chuck Cox <chuck@synchro.com>
Wild men don't get the blues either.


------------------------------


Date: Tue, 2 Mar 93 8:50:40 cdt
From: "Butts,Stephen J" <BUTTS@AC.GRIN.EDU>
Subject: Correnty Blend


Colleagues:


OK, OK, I surrender.  Everyone within 500 miles of Paul Correnty's orchard in 
Somewhere, MA has used this fabulous must with its attendant superlative wild 
yeasts to make this wonderful brew that has fermented out just right (and has 
apparently even cleared by now).  Meanwhile, I'm sitting here in Nowhere, IA, 
working with apples that struggled through a wet spring and summer  to pro- 
duce the barest hint of aroma and flavor and a must that while exquisitely 
blended and pressed is about as rich and aromatic as a McDonald's milkshake.  
Not to mention fighting off wild yeasts as sour as the couple in the famous 
Grant Wood painting with a baseball bat.  Not to mention that the stuff will 
probably clear sometime during Clinton's second term.


So I give up; the East Coast wins again.  But now that that's established, 
and to give your poor Midwest cousins a fighting chance for next year --


WHAT'S IN THE FURSHLUGGINER STUFF?????


- -- Steve Butts
   BUTTS@GRIN1.BitNet
   BUTTS@AC.GRIN.EDU


------------------------------