Subject: Correnty's blend; oak finished cider.
Date: 10 Mar 93 20:38:02 EST
From: Paul & Anita Correnty <71174.1121@CompuServe.COM>


  Greetings!


  I guess that this year's cider turned out okay...(!).for those that
are wondering, Correnty's blend is a carefully chosen cuvee of apples
that is custom pressed and distributed at the annual Ciderfest picnic
at Anderson apple orchards in Westford, Ma.  The apples that go into
this blend are chosen on the basis of quality, availability, and
compatibility with each other and are purchased from trusted growers in
Mass. and N.H.(I've been buying from many of these folks for over 10
years). This blend, although delicious as sweet cider, was formulated
with the idea of hard cider as the main objective.


  Each year the blend is different and reflects not only the wealth of
apples in New England but also the prevailing weather conditions and
the particulars of the varieties themselves (some apples i.e. Baldwin
produce every other year). I strive for a blend of sweet dessert apples
and antique apples or rare cider apples to achieve a balance between
sugar, acid and tannin.


  This year two pressings were done:
  
  -350 gals. consisting of 25% red Gravenstein, 15% green Gravenstein, 
10% Staymen Winesap and 50% Anderson blend (red and golden delicious, 
Paula Red, Macintosh, Cortland, and lots of Rome). This cider was
pressed from mid season varieties in early October and was the "magical
blend" that the Worts and BFD members are raving about.


  -110 gals. consisting of 35% Northern Spy, 25% Baldwin, 10% Roxbury
Russett and 30% Anderson blend. This was pressed in early November from
late season varieties.


  For all who are interested in acquiring cider for next season: why
not plan an outing next fall to view New England's foliage, attend the 
Ciderfest picnic, and pick some up? More info will be available as the
season approaches...


  For Steve S. and anyone else who would like to finish their cider
with a kiss of oak:


  Rack a finished, robust cider into a clean oak barrel, filling it up
to the top and bunging it tight. If the barrel is new, taste it after 5
days then every day until the taste of oak lingers briefly on the
finish (mine stayed 7 days in new oak). Be carefull not to let it stay
in too long as the wood will overpower the delicate apple taste and
aroma.  The same result can be had using sterilized oak chips, although
the contact time is lengthened due to the lessened surface area. Karen
at Beer and Wine Hobby recommended a maximum of 2 weeks.


  Lots of luck, happy bottling (early March: traditional bottlin' time)


 Paul Correnty




------------------------------