Subject: Digest # 270
Date: 16 Mar 93 19:43:01 EST
From: Paul & Anita Correnty <71174.1121@CompuServe.COM>




  Greetings!


  By the way Bill your cider was super, after that evening I'm
surprised that you didn't drink the entire carboy to ease your aching
body...


  Hmmmm, 1.012 does sound a little high. Why not prime, fill and cap
one bottle then place it in a warm place for a week or two to see if it
does indeed become a Slack Cocktail or not? I would place it in a
cardboard box for safety's sake. If it carbonates and stays off-dry
then you're all set.


  Cider yeast is one of the most vigorous and hungry ones around so I
see no reason why it wouldn't freeze well. Give it a try!


  Good luck.


  Paul Correnty




------------------------------


Date: Wed, 17 Mar 93 15:09:32 cdt
From: "Butts,Stephen J" <BUTTS@AC.GRIN.EDU>
Subject: Cider Sludge


Bill Slack and others with yeast slurry:


I can't comment much on using leftover yeast for more cider, but it sure
makes great bread!  I use about a quarter cup of slurry in a cup or so of
"sponge:"  a Tablespoon of cornmeal cooked for 10 min., or so with water 
until thickened, then mixed with a couple of T. of bread flour to make a thin
paste.  Let the yeast start to work and then add more flour and water to
make a larger but still thin sponge, and when that's going, proceed with
whatever bread recipe you like.  Remember to remove about a quarter cup of
the last sponge as "starter" for the next batch.  The trick here, if any,
is to work relatively slowly and at cooler temperatures than "regular"
homemade bread, and to maintain sanitation for your starter.  I suppose the
yeast eventually mutates or goes bad, or whatever, but I'm still working
with the progeny of last October's fermentation, and in any case, it's only
6 months till the next batch of cider.


Works great with beer glop too!


- -- Steve Butts
   BUTTS@AC.GRIN.edu
   BUTTS@GRIN1.BitNet


------------------------------