Subject: Re: cider haze
Date: Fri, 7 May 1993 10:10:52 -0400
From: Bill Flowers <waflowers@qnx.com>


In Cider Digest #283, Eric Soshea <technet!eas@uunet.UU.NET> says:
> I know that purists will cringe at my methods, but my wife, for whom this 
> was made, loved it (last bottle this weekend). I'm now looking forward to
> making my second batch. Was my experience with clearing due to the addition
> of the cran/rasp or to the ale yeast I used? Or is this normal even for
> naturally fermented cider using the apple yeast after a few months in a 
> carboy?


I guess I'm not a purist; I see nothing wrong with your methods.


My only cider experience (plus 2 batches of INCREDIBLE, AMAZING cyser,
recipe available on request) both started with completely opaque sweet
cider (plus honey for the cyser) and ended completely clear.  The cider
fermented slower (I didn't pitch yeast, just used whatever wild yeast came
with it -- the results are quite yummy) and cleared slower, i.e. a month or
so. The cyser was fermented with champagne yeast and cleared within weeks.


I'm not sure, but I get the feeling that it will clear when the alcohol
content rises to a certain point (i.e. when the gravity falls to a certain
point).  It appears that the pieces of pulp, etc. can't stay suspended when
the liquid becomes thinner.  Maybe.
- ---
W.A. (Bill) Flowers                email: waflowers@qnx.com
QNX Software Systems, Ltd.         QUICS: bill     (613) 591-0934 (data)
(613) 591-0931 (voice)             mail:  175 Terrence Matthews
(613) 591-3579 (fax)                      Kanata, Ontario, Canada K2M 1W8


------------------------------


Date: 07 May 1993 11:37:05 -0600 (MDT)
From: Mark Taratoot <SLNDW@CC.USU.EDU>
Subject: CIDER!!


Greetings!


Well, my first attempt at cider is starting to get better.  It
was made from fresh cider that I sulfated and added wine yeast.
It is quite tart and dry.  It has a wonderful apple nose when opened.
It has been in the bottle for about 4 months and is mellowing.


My next attempt is still fermenting.  It is a cyser with
4 gallons of cider and 7-8 pounds of honey.  I am fermenting
it at cooler temps to keep as much flavor as possible.  Upon
racking it is nice.  I made this about when I bottled cider #1.
It is starting to clear and I plan on bottling it in 6-12 weeks.
I am going to sparkle about half of it.


When I made this cyser, I also put one gallon of fresh
cider in a jug and fitted it with an airlock.  It fermented
on it's naturally occuring yeast.  It smelled terrible.  It has
not cleared at all.  I kept it cool so bacteria would grow slower,
but it seemed this batch was destined for watering the grass.
When I racked it a couple of weeks ago, I put the last 5 ounces
left in the jug in a bottle and capped it.  It cleared.  I let
it sit a few weeks and I opened it last night.  It is YUMMY!
It has a lovely color...golden.  The nose is apples.  The
flavor is delicate and fresh.  This really is good.  I must
admit I am pretty anal about sanitation, and letting this
gallon go off was kind of different for me, but I think I will
definately do it again!  I am going to refridgerate the jug in
a couple of days to clear it, then bottle.  It may carbonate just
a bit in the next few months, but it is great still.  


So, I am now a new convert to natural fermentation!  Too bad
that apple season is so far away :(


Do it!
Brew it!


and when you rack... 
toss some back!


 -toot


------------------------------