Subject: sour cider
Date: Mon, 12 Jul 1993 19:05:35 -0500 (CDT)
From: dspalme@mke.ab.com (Diane Palme x2617)


Hi all!


        I posted to the newsgroup a while ago telling of my first try at
a cider.  Unfortunately, it has turned out somewhat less than expected. 
It has been fermenting for about a month now and is starting to taste just
like apple cider vinegar!  :-(  I was wondering if any of you might be
able to lend a little insight on the problem.  The cider consists of 3 1/2
gallons of unfiltered apple cider, 1 pound dry malt extract, 1 cup maple
sugar and 2 cups brown sugar.  Fermentation was accomplished using Whit-
bread Ale Yeast in a 7 gallon carboy.  The stuff went like gangbusters for
a few days, then settled down, then went like crazy again.  Hmmmm.  I am
truly at a loss.


        If no one has any ideas about what to do with the stuff, is any-
one interested in some fresh cider vinegar?  About 5 gallons worth?  :-)


TIA,


Diane
- -- 
Diane Palme
Department Engineer, Central Inspection
Allen-Bradley Co.
(414) 382-2617
dspalme@mke.ab.com


               " I have found that it is much easier to fake an
                 orgasm than to pretend to like basketball. "


Oh yeah, um, what I say is my opinion, um, what I think are my own ideas, uh,
Allen-Bradley has nothing to do with them, uh, yeah.  That's about it.


------------------------------


Date: Mon, 12 Jul 1993 19:55:34 -0400 (EDT)
From: Michael H. Warfield <mhw@wittsend.atl.ga.us>
Subject: Re: Campagne cider


> The following recipe was posted to "rec.crafts.brewing":
> 
>       Buy a gallon of apple juice.
>       Drink a few glasses to make room.
>       Add 2 lb sugar and yeast, let ferment to completeion.
>       Prime and bottle as if it was beer.
>       After it clears in about a month, you will have some good apple "champag
ne"


        Hmmm...  Not bad but will probably be a little bland.  2 lb sugars
sounds like too much though.


> I was looking for comments/suggestions of this recipe.
> In particular, what type of "sugar" should one add to the cider?


        I just use cane sugar.


        American apples lack several things that go into a really good
champagne cider.  Here's my variation.  Note that I make 2 - 5 gallon
batches at a time throughout the cooler months.  I make about 100 gallons
a year of this stuff for personal use and gifts.  Makes me REAL popular
with the gift getters...   :-) :-)


        Sorry if this sounds more like a chemistry set than a receipe
but simple apple cider just lacks so much and needs something to pick it up.


        5 Gallons of Apple cider (no preservatives).
        5 lbs Sugar (simple cane sugar is just fine)
        4 Cans frozen apple concentrate (optional - I usually don't)
        40 Grams Tartaric Acid
        40 Grams Malic Acid
        30 Grams Yeast Nutrient
        3 Grams Grape Tannin
        1 packet Red Star champagne yeast
               (I know Red Star has a lousy reputation with beer yeasts
               but the champagne yeast is top notch.  I've had not problems
               and I've heard no complains on any lists or newsgroups
               about their champagne yeast.)


        Mix grape tannin with these sugar before adding to cider to make
it easier to disolve.  Straight tannin is a real pain to mix in a liquid.


        Before mixing, the cider will probably be about 1.045 to 1.055 S.G
and titrate out to about .45% TT on acid.  If not adjust acids and sugar
accordingly.  Grape tannin is very critical and easy to over measure -
just a VERY small amount makes an incredible difference.


        After mixing:


        O.G should be in the range 1.090 to 1.100 depending on the
cider and whether you added the apple concentrate.  Acid sould now
titrate out to .95 to 1.00% TT.  Note that this is quite high on
acid.  That is on purpose.  Fermenting a high acid must takes longer to
age but I don't require any sulphites!  (My kids are asthmatics which
makes me a fanatic about avoiding sulphites which can be LETHAL!)


        Activate the yeast in a little cider and add to the must.


        Temperature is IMPORTANT!


        Ferment at 60 degrees for four weeks or until the S.G is 1.002 or
lower.  Rack and add 1 lb sugar to prime.  Prime carfully.  When racked
it's still LOADED with CO2!  Adding sugar straight to the must will cause
it to FOAM LIKE A FIZZY!


        Bottle in champagne bottles with mushroom stoppers and WIRE SECURELY!
One lb priming in 5 gallons results in 5-6 atmospheres of pressure!  I get
26 bottles at 750 ml per bottle from 5 gallons.


        Let ferment in bottle for another 4 weeks.


        Note that the Malic acid will ferment to latic acid during
secondary fermentation.  This largely accounts for the mellowing
as it ages.  I think the flavor "peaks" at about 6 months but your
milage may vary.


        Now...  If your lazy (like me) you can enjoy a rich, dry, semi-tart
champagne cider now.  If you want to dress up a few bottles you need
to disgourge (sp?) the yeast from the bottles (check wine books for
proceedure) add capsule, label, and put on display.


- -- 
 Michael H. Warfield    | (404) 925-8248       | mhw@WittsEnd.atl.ga.us
  (The Mad Wizard)      | NIC whois: MHW9      | wittsend!mhw@emory.edu
An optimist believes we live in the best of all possible worlds.
A pessimist is sure of it!


------------------------------