Subject: BCA Turner
Date: 22 Jul 1993 12:02:00 -0800 (PST)
From: Philip Atkinson 356-0269 <PATKINSON@galaxy.gov.bc.ca>




- --Boundary (ID d3EqRfC4QEufDSYmsLxCVA)
Content-type: TEXT/PLAIN; CHARSET=US-ASCII


          


- --Boundary (ID d3EqRfC4QEufDSYmsLxCVA)
Content-type: MESSAGE/RFC822


Date: Thu, 22 Jul 1993 11:24:00 PST
From: "Philip Atkinson"@mr.gov.bc.ca
Subject: BCA Turner
Content-type: TEXT/PLAIN; CHARSET=US-ASCII
Posting-date: Thu, 22 Jul 1993 00:00:00 PST
A1-type: DOCUMENT


          Some words of wisdom from B.C.A. Turner, one of Britain's cider 
          experts:
          
          The best cider is made from varieties of apples particularly 
          grown for the purpose. A blend of bitter sweet, bitter sharp and 
          sweet sharp apples is best, the proportions varying with the 
          quality of the fruit and the type of cider being made. The 
          majority of the apples must be sweet in order to provide the 
          sugar to make the alcohol but some acid, for freshness, and some 
          bitterness, for character, are also essential.
          
          The old varieties which our forebears would have used for cider 
          making have now almost died out and new dwarf ones that can be 
          mechanically harvested are taking their place. For those without 
          access to cider apples, however, a pleasant cider can be made 
          from dessert, cooking and crab apples, providing the principle 
          of blending is kept in mind. Cox's Orange pippins or other 
          `sweet' dessert apples make an excellent base for the sweet 
          side, Bramleys or other cooking varieties for the sharp, and 
          John Downie, Siberia or other crab apples for the bitter.
          A rule of thumb proportion is: 6 measures of sweet to 2.5 sharp 
          and 1.5 bitter, but the proportion is not critical and 7/2/1 or 
          6/2/2 would also be satisfactory. Some 20lb/9kg of fruit is 
          usually needed to produce an Imperial gallon/4.5 litres (5 US 
          quarts) of juice but this figure varies from season to season, 
          with the ripeness and type of fruit, and with the method of 
          juice extraction used.
          
          Once you have assembled the fruit, lay it out on trays for some 
          weeks to mellow. Try to ensure that the apples are not touching 
          one another - if one apple starts to go bad, the infection will 
          not then spread to the others. A cool dark place is best for 
          storage, but if the apples must be stored in a light room, cover 
          them with brown paper. Polythene (plastic) is not so suitable as 
          it attracts condensation.
          
          Once the fruit has mellowed, it must be washed thoroughly to 
          remove all traces of leaf, grass, dust and so on. Two crushed 
          Camden tablets and a half teaspoon/2.5 ml of citric acid 
          dissolved in an Imperial gallon/4.5 litres (5 US quarts) of cold 
          water for the final rinse will also kill off any unwanted 
          microbes. The fruit must be now be quickly crushed and pressed. 
          Speed is of the essence, since the besetting danger of 
          oxidation. A cut apple left exposed to the air until it turns 
          brown will have a flat taste, and this disappointing flavour can 
          easily spoil home-made cider. A stainless steel blade attached 
          to a stainless shaft that fits into the chuck of an electric 
          drill makes an excellent and speedy crusher. The bag used for 
          straining and pressing the fruit should be sterilized with a 
          sulphite solution, and a crushed Camden tablet for every Imp. 
          gallon/4.5 litres (5 US quarts) of juice in the receiving bin 
          will also help prevent oxidation.
          
                                            
          --------------------------------------------------------------
          I have a recipe for a dry, still cider from this same source. 
          E-mail direct if you'd like a copy.
          
          Phil Atkinson
          Victoria, BC


- --Boundary (ID d3EqRfC4QEufDSYmsLxCVA)--


------------------------------