Subject: Defunct user [Re: Cider Digest #309 Mon Aug 2 18:00:04 EDT 1993]
Date: Mon, 2 Aug 93 17:19:56 -0500
From: daemon@convex.convex.com (Our friend the daemon)


The referenced mail message was received by "duncan", a user who is 
no longer with the company and for whom we have no forwarding address, 
which means there is no one there to read your mail!  This mail appears 
to have been directed to the following address(es): 


    BOGUS


Please verify that you actually mailed the person whom you were
intending to mail.  If you mailed a group alias, you should contact 
that alias's owner and explain to them that the alias contains an
ex-employee.  If you have further questions, please address them 
to notes problems.


The Mailer Daemon


------------------------------


Date: Tue, 03 Aug 1993 10:31:00 -0700 (PDT)
From: Philip Atkinson 356-0269 <PATKINSON@galaxy.gov.bc.ca>
Subject: cider, of course


          The Turner article was a section from an British publication, 
          Country Wines and Cordials, Marshall-Cavendish, London, 1980.
          
          Greg Appleyard might get info. regarding the Cider Research 
          Institute by contacting Conn Copas at Leicester University, a 
          subscriber to the Home Brewers Digest - it's a long shot but 
          E-mail me if you wish to pursue it ...
          
          Here is the article from What's Brewing' CAMRA Victoria, June 
          1993:
          
                Al Piggott hosted 18 CAMRA members and guests at his 
          Merrydale Cider Works on April 17. This is B.C.'s first 
          estate-cidery and is located at Cobble Hill.
                The visit started with a tasting of Merridasle's lovely 
          English-style cider. It is quite dry and made using only 
          traditional cider apples, i.e. not the eating varieties! 
          Varieties grown at Merridale include Chisel Jersey, Yarlington 
          Mill, Reinette Obry, Tramlett's Bitter, Dabinett, Bulmer's 
          Norman and Michelin. According to Al, these apples taste like 
          `wet used teabags' because of the very high tannin in them. Al 
          was very informative and kept the group amused with his quips.
                The 14-acre orchard has some new cider variety trees 
          imported from France. Last year's production of about 8,000 
          gallons will provide many visitors to the beer festival* in 
          October with their first taste of real cider.
          
          *1993 Victoria Microbrewery Festival - E-mail for info.
          
          And last, but by no means least ...Congratulations to Jay Hersh 
          for winning the blue ribbon at the AHA competition! Any chance 
          we get to see the winning recipe Jay?
          
          waes hael
          Phil Atkinson
          Victoria, BC






------------------------------