Subject: Defunct user [Re: Cider Digest #312 Thu Aug 5 18:00:03 EDT 1993]
Date: Thu, 5 Aug 93 17:13:30 -0500
From: daemon@convex.convex.com (Our friend the daemon)


The referenced mail message was received by "duncan", a user who is 
no longer with the company and for whom we have no forwarding address, 
which means there is no one there to read your mail!  This mail appears 
to have been directed to the following address(es): 


    BOGUS


Please verify that you actually mailed the person whom you were
intending to mail.  If you mailed a group alias, you should contact 
that alias's owner and explain to them that the alias contains an
ex-employee.  If you have further questions, please address them 
to notes problems.


The Mailer Daemon


------------------------------


Date: Thu, 5 Aug 93 21:37:59 EDT
From: Ron Graff <graff@gandalf.rutgers.edu>
Subject: peaches


Hello cider brewers,


Although I've never posted before, I've been reading the digest for a little
while and must say the information shared here is extremely helpful.  BTW, if
you're out there Greg Appleyard, did you get your undergraduate degree at U.
of Waterloo?...
Anyhow, since its peach season, can someone advise me on starting up a batch
of peach cider rather quickly? I'm afraid if I just substitute peaches for
apples (and maintain the same acidity etc) that the results will be, well,
less than impressive except perhaps as insecticide.  Is this actually the
case?  Although apple cider is far and away better (I think), I did have a
peach cider made in Ontario (Growers of course, but I actually had it in
Comox BC) and it was amusing enough to warrant giving it a try if time
permits.  (read: my girlfriend just came back from picking peaches and my
guess is that you can no longer see even the mould on the refrigerator
shelves) Can someone share a recipe or some hints on how the ingredients list
should read?


Thanks in advance, 


Ron. (no signature because I dont know how, wouldn't know what to say anyway)


------------------------------