Subject: Re: Correnty Blend 
Date: Thu, 23 Dec 1993 18:21:21 EST
From: Jay Hersh <hersh@x.org>




The Blend is one made by our local cider guru Paul Correnty, a member of the
Boston Wort Processors club who knows many orchard owners here near Boston.
I don't know off hand specifics of the blend this year (someone in the club
listening in might) though if you got the cider intro it was Paul who wrote up
the guidelines on percentages of different classes (and which apples are in
each class) of apples that make good cider.




        JaH


------------------------------


Date: Thu, 23 Dec 93 20:26:58 EST
From: wslack.UUCP!wrs@mv.mv.com.MV.COM (Bill Slack)
Subject: Re: Correnty blend


Brian O'Gorman sez:
:I see some reference to the Correnty blend in these postings.
:Exactly what is the Correnty blend? Is this a blend of cider
:apples.  


Hey, Jay, maybe we need a FAQ for this list. Here's the story on Correnty
Blends.


Paul Correnty of Pepperell MA is a well known cider and apple guru and he
puts together a blend of apples every year for the Boston Wort Processors
and members of Brew Free or Die. Paul knows a _lot_ about apples and how to
make a successful cider. He is in touch with all the orchards in this part
of New England and knows what will be available and how good it will be. His
taste runs to fairly tart mixes but of course it varies each year depending
on availability. This year's blend was sweeter than usual. I have used
several of his blends and they have all fermented successfully from the
natural yeast found on the apples.


Paul occasionally makes smaller specialized batches if you bug him hard
enough. For the last two years hehas made up some small batches with Roxbury
Russets in it. I saved some slurry from that second batch last year and the
yeast was isolated by Seth Cohen. I named it Correnty-II, meaning the yeast
from Paul's second batch of juice from 1992. The yeast has been used by
several people to ferment meads, ciders and cysers. I mention it because the
term has been used a lot.


Paul publishes the types and percentages of apples in all his mixes and I
could post them here if there is interest. But it is of limited value
because it represents a mix of apples from a particular time and place, and
conditions are not always the same. He also makes beer, wine and mead and it
is a lot of fun walking around in his cellar.


Bill
__
wrs@gozer.mv.com (Bill Slack)
    


------------------------------