Subject: Mead Lover's Digest #479, 19 May 1996
From: mead-request@talisman.com


Mead Lover's Digest #479                                  19 May 1996

            Forum for Discussion of Mead Making and Consuming
                      Dick Dunn, Digest Janitor

Contents:
  Sulphite ("Tom Lentz")
  re: honey, etc. (Michael L. Hall)
  Re: Sources of honey, Chinese Honey, etc ("Patrick M. O'Hearn")
  Honey in Alberta? (Todd Tuffs)
  Cyser clearing (Frank J. Kovac)

NOTE: Digest only appears when there is enough material to send one.
Send ONLY articles for the digest to mead@talisman.com.
Use mead-request@talisman.com for [un]subscribe/admin requests.  When
    subscribing, please include name and email address in body of message.
Digest archives and FAQ are available for anonymous ftp at ftp.stanford.edu
    in pub/clubs/homebrew/mead.
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Sulphite
From: "Tom Lentz" <tlentz@teknon.com>
Date: Tue, 14 May 96 10:23:22 


     Hello.  I've been lurking here for several months now, but this is my 
     first post to the newsletter.  I've been making mead for about 4 years 
     now, completely self-taught, and it's getting quite popular with my 
     friends!
     
     I've got some quesitons regarding the addition of sulphite, or Campden 
     Tablets, to mead.  I know some people who are sensitive to sulphite 
     (headaches) and I don't want to put too much in.  How much is too 
     much?  For comparison, how much sulphite (approx. # of Campden tabs) 
     is in an off-the-shelf bottle of wine?  I try to use as little as 
     possible, and don't think I put in very much at all, but I want to be 
     sure.  Guess I'm too paranoid to use none at all.
     
     Also, the tablets are sometimes hard to get to dissolve.  Can I add 
     them during the boil of the must?  How about adding nutrient or acid 
     during this stage also?  I usually wait until it's cooled.
     
     TIA!
     
     Tom.

------------------------------

Subject: re: honey, etc.
From: hall@galt.c3.lanl.gov (Michael L. Hall)
Date: Tue, 14 May 96 12:32:32 MDT

[What follows is my response to Tom Messenger's comments on honey
adulteration. Please keep in mind that all the information I have 
is second-hand (and therefore unconfirmed). I welcome all discussion
(e.g. Rich Webb's comments in today's MLD) and am anxious to hear 
from a bona fide beekeeper. I think that we meadmakers could potentially
benefit by more knowledge about honey production and the bees
themselves.]

Tom,

Thanks for responding. I agree with a lot of what you said, but I've got
a couple of comments:

  - Your explanation of why big company honey is inferior (heavy
    filtration, heat pasteurization, dilution) makes sense.
  
  - My example of trucking bees around is actually pretty hazy -- the
    meading was last November and I was drinking mead at the time :-).
    However, I do distinctly remember that this beekeeper used to do
    that kind of work and quit because he thought it was bad for the
    bees. He also mentioned that this was the major method of
    pollinating the food crops.
  
  - It still seems to me that sugar is cheaper than honey, so one could
    possibly increase the worth of their product by shooting it through
    a bee. As far as tariffs go, I think this beekeeper was in favor of
    higher protective tariffs, to even out the perceived inequities
    related to production standards.
  
  - You say you can't make honey by feeding bees sugar. I'm not
    completely convinced. I wonder if there are any beekeepers on the
    list who have more info.
  
  - And I of course agree with the bottom line: buy local for character!

> P.S. Now that I've written this, I think I'll send it along to the digest
> also just to see what sort of flames it will fire up!

Good, I was going to suggest that. This kind of message definitely has
broader interest on the MLD than just me. I'll post the above replies
after your post comes out, so I don't confuse anyone. Please let me know
when you've posted to the MLD.

After writing the above, I went hunting on the net for more info on
beekeeping and honey. The info was fairly sparse, but I did get this
response from a listserver (send email to: HINT.103@beenet.com with
Subject: HONEY ADULTERATION):

- ----- Begin Included Message -----

>From postmaster@beenet.com Fri May 10 20:56:32 1996
From: postmaster@beenet.com
Subject: Auto response
Organization: WILD BEE'S BBS (209) 826-8107 LOS BANOS, CA
To: hall@galt.c3.lanl.gov

                            HINT FOR THE HIVE # 103

                               HONEY ADULTERATION 


        Florida law defines honey as only the natural food product made by 
honeybees from the nectar or flowers or saccharine exudation of plants, 
containing no additives.  The law also requires all products labelled "honey" 
to be pure honey as defined above.  Adulteration, or addtion of foreign 
substances to honey has long been a problem.  In general, however, most 
adulterants are relatively easy to test for.  

        Advent of high fructose corn syrup (HFCS), however, provided adulterers 
with an almost perfect replica of honey with which to adulterate.  It has 
become extremely profitable to do so, because the possibility exists to mix 80 
to 90% HFCS in honey without being detected by the consumer.  

        A self-policing program has been in effect since the mid 1970s by the 
beekeeping industry and several persons have been found guilty and sentenced 
for adulteration.  The success of the program is based on two factors:  (1) 
that the beekeeper understand that feeding bees either sugar syrup or HFCS can 
lead to adulteration; (2) that the beekeeper become the eyes of the program and 
send suspcious samples of honey to the Secretary, American Beekeeping 
Federation, 13637 N. W. 39th Ave., Gainesville, FL 32601.  

        Adulterated honey might be suspected for one of several reasons 
including: 

        1.  No flavor, just sweetness 
        2.  Very light or very dark in color 
        3.  Molasses flavor 
        4.  Consistently low in price 
                                           
[snip]

- ----- End Included Message -----

So it sounds like it's possible to get "fake" honey by feeding sugar to
bees. Maybe someone with more experience in beekeeping will comment.

- -Mike

------------------------------

Subject: Re: Sources of honey, Chinese Honey, etc
From: "Patrick M. O'Hearn" <patrick@cyberport.com>
Date: Tue, 14 May 1996 12:35:37 -0600

Dennis B. Lewis Jr. wrote:
> Does anyone have any favorite mail-order supply houses where
> one can buy bulk honey (like 5 gal pails)?

Hello All,
In almost every part of the country you should be able to 
find a local beekeeper to purchase bulk honey from.  Honey 
weighs 12 lb per gallon and freight on 60lb (5 gal) bulk 
shipments would add a bit to your price.  Besides, you 
should make it a habit to support your local beekeeper <g>.
Call your county extension agent or your animal control 
officer (many beekeepers leave their names and numbers with 
both places to be notified when swarms are found).  Depending 
on your state, the beekeeper may register with the state 
department of agriculture.  Many beekeepers are not listed in 
the yellow pages so dont assume that there are no beekeepers 
in your area because there are no telephone book listings.

As to the other posts about Chinese Honey, the problem was 
primarily "dumping" of honey (selling below cost of 
production) rather than feeding sugar.  I agree with several 
of the posters that FEEDING sugar would be a fairly poor way 
to adulterate honey but, an easy way to adulterate honey is 
to mix honey with high fructose or other types of sugars.  
This adulteration does occur and is profitable.  There was a 
packer in the United States that was aquitted of charges of 
doing just this last year and the charge surfaces too often 
not to be true in some cases.  With the sharp increase in the 
price of honey lately, and the sharply reduced production due 
to hive deaths from mites I am afraid we will see a lot more 
of this type of adulteration in the future.

Beekeepers do feed sugar water in the spring, or when 
building up a swarm but any beekeeper worth of the name 
discontinues any sugar feeding prior to placing honey supers 
(the boxes the bees use to store the honey we extract and 
sell to you) on the hive so this sugar water doesnt make it 
into anything other than the stores the bees will keep for 
themselves.

BTW, thanks to all who responded to my queries about cyser 
clearing.  The consensus was that cyser will clear at least 
as well as traditional mead.  My batch is in its third month, 
acting about like mead at this point in time, and beginning 
to clear slowly.

take care
Patrick M. O'Hearn
Bears Choice Honey
email patrick@cyberport.com

------------------------------

Subject: Honey in Alberta?
From: muskwa@agt.net (Todd Tuffs)
Date: Tue, 14 May 1996 19:49:19 -0600 (MDT)

I live in southern Alberta (near Calgary), and am looking for a good place 
to buy honey (non-generic IE Beekist). Also, I am looking for some clues as 
to where to get "Sparkloid" around here. (I read about it in Mead Lovers # 
478).  

Paula Tuffs
Okotoks, Alberta, Canada
muskwa@agt.net

------------------------------

Subject: Cyser clearing
From: gr105@cleveland.Freenet.Edu (Frank J. Kovac)
Date: Wed, 15 May 1996 08:42:40 -0400

Generally, I've had no problems with either filtered or 
unfiltered apple juice.  I allow a year to clear but
sometimes will use Sparkalloid if my thirst demands it.

I found no benefit in using unfiltered apple juice.
Apparently the goodies are not filtered out.
It does triple the dregs.
I prefer late season juice. The early juice is mostly
red delicious and not as interesting as the the later
tarter rogues which are apt to produce a faint pineapple
nose. Of course I use no chemicals.

Cheers are cheerier with cyser....

------------------------------

End of Mead Lover's Digest #479
*******************************
