Subject: Cider Digest #580, 15 February 1996
From: cider-request@talisman.com




Cider Digest #580                                         15 February 1996


                 Forum for Discussion of Cider Issues
                      Dick Dunn, Digest Janitor


Contents:
  sweet, carbonated cider (John B Gilmour)
  malolactic fermentation (newbie) (lprescot@sover.net)
  vermont update (lprescot@sover.net)


Send ONLY articles for the digest to cider@talisman.com.
Use cider-request@talisman.com for subscribe/unsubscribe/admin requests.
    When subscribing, please include your name and a good address in the
    message body unless you're sure your mailer generates them.
Archives of the Digest are available for anonymous FTP at ftp.stanford.edu
    in pub/clubs/homebrew/cider.
----------------------------------------------------------------------


Subject: sweet, carbonated cider
From: John B Gilmour <jbgilm@malthus.morton.wm.edu>
Date: Mon, 12 Feb 1996 13:21:34 -0500 (EST)


I have made several batches of sweet, carbonated cider.  The problem, of 
course, is how to kill of the yeast in the bottle.  The first time I made 
it, I bottled and capped the cider and left it to ferment overnight.  The 
next day I boiled the bottles in large kettles.  About a third of them 
exploded spectacularly.  Since then I have learned two things.  First, 
sweet cider does not have to ferment long in the bottle.  A little 
carbonation is plenty, and reduces the probability of the bottle 
exploding.  A couple of hours is enough.  Second, immersing the bottles 
in water straight from the hot water heater will suffice to kill the 
yeast.  I set the water heater to 140 degrees Fahrenheit, put the bottles 
in a fermenting bucket and filled it with water, and that killed the 
yeast very dead.  It does not even take long -- less than an hour.  As 
soon as they are dead, the yeast drop out of suspension quickly and form 
a sludge on the bottom.  The cider fully clears over another week or so.


------------------------------


Subject: malolactic fermentation (newbie)
From: lprescot@sover.net
Date: Mon, 12 Feb 1996 18:01:22 -0500




Hello!


I've been brewing beer and making mead and other wines for several years now, 
so I have at least some experience. I have finally done my first batch of 
cider. It took me some time to work up the courage, because of a batch of 
cyser that went awry a couple of years ago.


Anyhow, I'm a little confused. The recipes I've pulled off the internet state 
relatively short primary and secondary fermentation times. However, I've read 
a book by Annie Proulx and Lew Nichols which states that malolactic 
fermentation can take place MONTHS after fermentation, producing CO2, and 
potentially blowing corks.


Here's my plan: 


five gallons of preservative-free cider, and ten grams of Munton Ale yeast. 
O.G. 1055. I pitched last night, and it's going full speed. I have intended to 
bottle this as a still cider to beer bottles with crown caps so that should 
the malolactic ferment take off this summer I will just have a fizzier 
beverage.


Additionally, I live on the side of a mountain in Vermont which is subject to 
temperature variations. I heat my house with wood, which can also fluctuate 
the temperature, but since the wood is free, my house stays pretty warm in the 
winter.


OK: the questions:


1) Am I being naive? Making any mistakes with this process?


2) How much of a factor is malolactic fermentation with this recipe in these 
conditions?


3) Does anyone know what other sorts of fruits contain malic acid ?


4) Finally, I tried to observe proper netiquette by looking for a cider FAQ, 
but couldn't find one. Is there one?


5) Any other comments on the ins, outs, and perils, if any, of malolactic 
occurances for the newbie?


private email is fine.


Thank you all in advance!


David Prescott, Shaftsbury, Vermont. lprescot@sover.net


------------------------------


Subject: vermont update
From: lprescot@sover.net
Date: Mon, 12 Feb 1996 19:37:45 -0500




Hello again!


I've noticed that my home state of Vermont has been mentioned here recently. 
Specifically, Woodchuck Cider seems to the subject of a few questions.


FWIW, the company that makes Woodchuck  is the Joseph Cerniglia Winery. They 
are centered in Cavendish (once home to Russian dissident author Alexandr 
Solzhenitzen, BTW), but have an "outlet" in Bennington, a better-known tourist 
destination. Cerniglia also makes many varietal apple wines which are pretty 
good, although a bit sweet by my home-made mead standards. They do a lot of 
mail order, and their number is (802) 442-3531. They make a Hard Cider, that, 
IMHO, is not as good as the Jacksonville, Vermont, North River Winery's 
"Metcalf's Hard Cider". However, the varietal wines are very interesting.


I'm not connected with Cerniglia. In fact, I think it's fairly obvious in 
visiting the Bennington "Winery" (Rt. 9 west, heading out of town) that it is 
NOT a winery at all, but a series of rather small oak casks designed to look 
like one. The rather squiffy young man who does the tastings often loses his 
snooty tone when he's down at one of the local bars drinking beer. But in 
spite of my criticism, I would recommend the phone call to get a catalog. 


There is probably a toll-free number, but I don't have it. I would welcome any 
email if you're thinking of heading this way. The best bet is the North River 
Winery, which offers numerous fruit wines, many with an apple base. They are 
also down the road from a famous maple sugar place (coombs), and set in one of 
the most beautiful areas on earth, in the Green Mountains, if you'll excuse 
the shameless region-o-centrism.


Cheers!




David Prescott, Shaftsbury, Vermont, Lprescot@sover.net


------------------------------


End of Cider Digest #580
*************************