Subject: Cider Digest #646, 10 February 1997
From: cider-request@talisman.com




Cider Digest #646                                         10 February 1997


                 Forum for Discussion of Cider Issues
                      Dick Dunn, Digest Janitor


Contents:
  A New Cider Company (Brian Black)


Send ONLY articles for the digest to cider@talisman.com.
Use cider-request@talisman.com for subscribe/unsubscribe/admin requests.
    When subscribing, please include your name and a good address in the
    message body unless you're sure your mailer generates them.
Archives of the Digest are available for anonymous FTP at ftp.stanford.edu
    in pub/clubs/homebrew/cider.
----------------------------------------------------------------------


Subject: A New Cider Company
From: Brian Black <b.black@worldnet.att.net>
Date: Thu, 06 Feb 1997 10:55:59 -0800


Well, we're finally off the ground, thanks in large part to all the help
I have gotten from Cider Digest.  Sorry about the formality of the Press
Release, but it is the best way to get the info across. Right now, we're
in three local restaurants, with five more committed when we get bottles
(March). We are selling very well. The restaurant owners are very
excited, and very supportive - the customers enjoy something different,
and I must say that Goldfinch turned out pretty good. Great color.


Let me know what you think! Thanks again for everyone's support!


PRESS RELEASE
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
FEBRUARY 10, 1997


LOCAL CIDER COMPANY TO MAKE FINE "HARD" CIDER FROM MICHIGAN APPLES


A new West Michigan cider company has announced that it is introducing
hand-crafted fine "hard" cider made exclusively from apples grown in
Michigan.  The Black and Fagan Cider Company is introducing Goldfinch
Cider (TM) at West Michigan restaurants in early 1997.


"My partner and I have been making  cider from Michigan apples for years
now, and we thought, well, people are interested in authentic regional
tastes, and Michigan cider is about as authentic as you can get. We
started commercial production this fall using only fresh-pressed juice,
just as we always have," explained Dan Fagan, Cidermaker.  "I learned
cidermaking in Normandy, France, while in college, when I should have
been studying. My love for cider came home with me, and we've been
making it ever since."


Goldfinch Cider is made in small batches and contains only
fresh-pressed  Michigan apple cider, and is marketed to both beer and
wine drinkers. Alcohol content is similar to beer, and Fagan describes
the flavor as "straightforward, apple-y, with just enough tartness to
make it balanced. You can really taste and smell the apples. It's great
by itself, and it goes very well with food."


"We have found that Goldfinch appeals primarily to premium beer and
microbrew drinkers," said Brian Black, Business Manager. "What we are
doing is introducing people to a traditional, fine beverage, just as the
microbreweries have done.  In this country, cider was as popular as beer
- - maybe more popular than beer - through the early 1800's. And just like
the true microbreweries, we're not 'inventing' something or 'producing'
some product that came out of  a marketing report or a focus group.
We're restoring a great, natural  beverage."


Black and Fagan worked with Kendall College of Art and Design to create
their logo and label designs. "A product made from one of Michigan's
best crops deserves to be promoted through one of our best colleges. I
have worked with Kendall College students before, and so I knew that
there was a great pool of talent available there," explained Black. "We
think that people will really appreciate that this is a local, homegrown
enterprise. Even our tap handles are hand-made."


Black and Fagan, who are cousins, grew up together in West Michigan.
They recently travelled to Quebec to meet with local cidermakers who are
reviving traditional cidermaking in Canada. 


Goldfinch Cider will be available both on-tap and in 12-ounce bottles.


FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:
Brian Black
B.BLACK@WORLDNET.ATT.NET


------------------------------


End of Cider Digest #646
*************************