Subject: Mead Lover's Digest #259, 26 January 1994
From: mead-lovers-request@eklektix.com


Mead Lover's Digest #259                                  26 January 1994

            Forum for Discussion of Mead Making and Consuming
                      Dick Dunn, Digest Coordinator

Contents:
  hmmm (Jim Sims)
  Fermented honey (Hugh Gwyn)
  PLEASE note correct addresses for digest! (Dick Dunn)
  American Mead Association (Dick Dunn)

Send ONLY articles for the digest to mead-lovers@eklektix.com.
Use mead-lovers-request@eklektix.com for subscribe, unsubscribe, and admin
    requests.  When subscribing, please include your name and a good address
    in the message body unless you're sure your mailer generates them.
There is an FTP archive of the digest on sierra.stanford.edu in pub/mead.
    If you have email access but not ftp, it will accept "listserv" requests.
    Send email with message "help" to listserv@sierra.stanford.edu.

------------------------------

Subject: hmmm
From: sims@pdesds1.scra.org (Jim Sims)
Date: Mon, 24 Jan 94 08:42:44 EST

 Seems I managed to dip my thermometer/hydrometer into the cooling
 wort a bit too soon and leave it a bit too long. It pegged the meter,
 so to speak. Even after cooling and storing upright for a coupla
 daze, the mercury inthe thermomter portion hasnt settled back to te
 bottom. In fact, it's now 'split' into two portions - at the bottom
 (claims the room temp is about 45), and a bit at the top.

 I've tried 'shaking' the mercury down like the nurse used to do with
 the thremometer at the Drs office, but it didnt seem to help.

 Is my thermometer useless/unfixable?

------------------------------

Subject: Fermented honey
From: hgwyn@magellan.geo.usherb.ca (Hugh Gwyn)
Date: Tue, 25 Jan 1994 13:20:21 -0500


    I've had some honey left-over from a mead that was hanging 
around.  Last week I decided to spread some on my toast (hey, 
an original thought!).  Open it up and I get a distinctly 
fermenting smell.  Hum, thinks I.  The honey had seperated, 
whitish cristalish stuff on the bottom and a VERY runny lair 
on the top.

    This, of course, is proof that my honey is untreated, 
which I was sure of anyway.  I buy it from a german sheep 
farmer who does a bit of honey on the side.  I've worked on 
his farm and seen his home-made honey extraction equipement.  

    So anyway, I thinks to myself, Hey, why don't I just plop 
this stuff into a gallon of water and make myself a small 
batch of mead.  But then I also wondered, will heating (not 
boiling, I don't boil, not me, just heat it enough to get some 
scum on top, then skim the scum off, (just my two bits to the 
boil discution)) the must kill the yeast?  Or should I just 
add some Camben tablets?  Or should I be ware of this honey?  

    Thank you for all info,
    -fil

------------------------------

Subject: PLEASE note correct addresses for digest!
From: rcd@raven.eklektix.com (Dick Dunn)
Date: 25 Jan 94 22:18:57 MST (Tue)

Folks, If you're submitting articles to the digest, or trying to subscribe/
unsubscribe/whatever, PLEASE note that the correct addresses are:
        mead-lovers-request@eklektix.com       subscribe, unsubscribe,
                                           admin requests
        mead-lovers@eklektix.com              articles ONLY

The old ...nsa.hp.com addresses are not correct, and now will not work.
The former digest coordinator, John Dilley, was gracious enough to set up
forwarding from old addresses to the new ones for a long time, to ease the
transition.  But it's been over three months now.  John has disabled the
forwarding.  Please note the new addresses.

(and thanks again to John for starting the Digest, running it well, and
helping with a smooth transition)
 ---
Dick Dunn    rcd@eklektix.com   -or-   raven!rcd    Boulder, Colorado USA
Digest Coordinator

------------------------------

Subject: American Mead Association
From: rcd@raven.eklektix.com (Dick Dunn)
Date: 26 Jan 94 00:28:08 MST (Wed)

As promised a while back, here's some info on the American Mead Associa-
tion.  I need to note at the outset that I'm not making any endorsement of
the AMA by submitting this article; I'm simply passing along information. 
I'm an ordinary member of the AMA and have no other connection to them.
I've divided the following into two parts: general info, and my own im-
pressions of what they're doing.
_ _ _ _ _

The American Mead Association was formed in 1986.  It was organized out of
Ohio by Pamela Spence-Allen.  In early 1993, it was taken over by Susanne
Price of Boulder, Colorado.  She's since moved to Grand Junction, Colorado,
to be nearer the honey- and fruit-producing areas of our state (in the
heart of Colorado's wine country;-)

Currently, the AMA publishes a quarterly newsletter and an annual journal.
The newsletter was called "MeadLetters" during 1993 and has now been
renamed (back to a previous name) "American Meadmaker".  The journal is
the "Meadmakers Journal".  A one-year basic membership, which includes a
year of the newsletter and one edition of the journal, costs $15.  This
also includes a membership card which is good for discounts at some
homebrew stores.

To subscribe, send $15 for one year to:
        American Mead Association
        P.O. Box 4666
        Grand Junction, CO  81502
        [phone (303)442-9111]

If you sign up, it would probably be useful to the AMA to tell them that
you found this information on the online Mead-Lover's Digest.  No, I don't
get a kickback!  But it's useful for any organization to know how people
find it.  Susanne and I have talked about how to get information back and
forth between MLD and the AMA; we'd like them to be synergistic.
_ _ _ _ _

My impressions:  It seems that Susanne took over the AMA and started almost
from scratch in re-shaping it.  The 1993 MeadLetters are reminiscent of the
1978 Zymurgy issues.  I have to say, at once, that the first issues were
very basic and a bit thin, and that they've been gaining ground rapidly,
both in content and in quality of presentation.  You've got to start some-
where.

If you're expecting a _Zymurgy_ or a _Brewing_Techniques_, _American_Mead-
maker_ isn't there yet.  But if you want information on mead, I don't know
where else you'd look (in the US) right now.  I see a potential being
realized.
 ---
Dick Dunn    rcd@eklektix.com   -or-   raven!rcd    Boulder, Colorado USA
   ...Mr Natural says, "Get the right tool for the job!"

------------------------------

End of Mead Lover's Digest #259
