Subject: Mead Lover's Digest #273, 6 March 1994
From: mead-lovers-request@eklektix.com


Mead Lover's Digest #273                                  6 March 1994

            Forum for Discussion of Mead Making and Consuming
                      Dick Dunn, Digest Coordinator

Contents:
  more pricing info (John Glaser)
  Mead Lover's Digest (byro@genie.geis.com)

Send ONLY articles for the digest to mead-lovers@eklektix.com.
Use mead-lovers-request@eklektix.com for subscribe, unsubscribe, and admin
    requests.  When subscribing, please include your name and a good address
    in the message body unless you're sure your mailer generates them.
There is an FTP archive of the digest on sierra.stanford.edu in pub/mead.
    If you have email access but not ftp, it will accept "listserv" requests.
    Send email with message "help" to listserv@sierra.stanford.edu.

------------------------------

Subject: more pricing info
From: John Glaser <glaser@analog.ece.arizona.edu>
Date: Sat, 5 Mar 94 14:34:22 -0700

Just another price data point. I get my honey for $0.70 to $0.80 a  
pound, for twenty-thirty pounds at a time. This is for unprocessed  
honey, either mesquite or citrus blossom, depending on what's  
available. This great price is due to the fact that I know a baker at  
a restaurant who can just tack my order onto the restaurants. The  
beekeeper doesn't care, and will even put my order in a separate  
bucket, as long as I promise to return the bucket (I usually include  
a couple bottles of mead for good measure).

Commercially, one can buy a two-pack (6lbs.) of semi-local honey  
(it's from Phoenix, I'm in Tucson) for just under $6 at the local  
Price Costco warehouse club, formerly Price Club. Don't know how  
processed it is, but it looks pretty clear. I've never used it for  
mead.

John Glaser (glaser@analog.ece.arizona.edu)

------------------------------

Subject: Mead Lover's Digest
From: byro@genie.geis.com
Date: Sat,  5 Mar 94 22:20:00 BST

I have brewed only 1 mead so far. It was made from raw honey, pure well water,
and a mix of European Ale yeast and Champagne yeast. I used 10 lbs honey
and added water to equal 5 gallons and the yeast. We didn't take specific
gravity. [ok, we're usually beer/ale brewers and usually more careful].
It took about 1 week for the mead to start fermenting enough to bubble the
airlock and it continued to ferment for several months, possibly 3 at
cool temperatures. We bottled it with 1/2 cup of honey and after aging
6 additional months it was tasted. It was clear, light straw color, semi-
dry, very carbonated with very tiny bubbles, and had a pronounced honey/
flowery bouquet. It has almost no honey taste, it's actually like a very
soft champagne with the honey all in the bouquet. [It's proved popular
enough that tasters of it have whined extra bottles out of us including
several friends in London] In any case, we're quite happy with it.
 
Our next project will need some help from more experienced mead brewers.
We would like to make a "wedding mead" in anticipation of that happy event
for two close friends. I understand that the Anglo-Saxons in pre-conquest
England made a wedding mead which was sweet and spiced. As this was also pre-
crusades...the spices used would not be those typically used now, right?
 
Anyone have any information or suggestions??
 
 Barb Byro
 BYRO@GENIE.GEIS.COM

------------------------------

End of Mead Lover's Digest #273
