Subject: Mead Lover's Digest #288, 6 April 1994
From: mead-lovers-request@eklektix.com


Mead Lover's Digest #288                                  6 April 1994

            Forum for Discussion of Mead Making and Consuming
                      Dick Dunn, Digest Coordinator

Contents:
  My First Batch is Ready!! (mpl@cmprime.att.com)
  Re: Mead Lover's Digest #287, 4 April 1994 (A Hoopy Frood Who ...)
  administrivia (Dick Dunn)

Send ONLY articles for the digest to mead-lovers@eklektix.com.
Use mead-lovers-request@eklektix.com for subscribe, unsubscribe, and admin
    requests.  When subscribing, please include your name and a good address
    in the message body unless you're sure your mailer generates them.
There is an FTP archive of the digest on sierra.stanford.edu in pub/mead.
    If you have email access but not ftp, it will accept "listserv" requests.
    Send email with message "help" to listserv@sierra.stanford.edu.

------------------------------

Subject: My First Batch is Ready!!
From: mpl@cmprime.att.com
Date: Tue, 5 Apr 94 8:49:46 EDT

Last August I began my first mead, patterned after Papazian's "Barkshack
Ginger Mead".  Anyway, after initial fermentation I primed and bottled,
and was not very pleased with it.  It was very alcoholy, with soap
undertones, despite the wonderful smell.  Anyway, I let it age a while,
and now it's just fine!  It is only very slightly effervescent, with an
aroma of apricots.  In taste, it's something between a chardonnay and a
zinfandel.  Quite nice.  I made 5 gallons, so I'll likely have plenty to
let it age even longer.

Now that I know I can do it, I'm eager to try another mead.  I made this
one using "beer techniques" - sanitizing everything, bringing the must
almost to a boil - I'm interested in getting some good recipes with less
work, since I'm hearing about people who just use campden tablets, or
nothing in the must.  I also would like to try something a little
sweeter.  My first mead had 10 pounds of honey in 5 gallons of water.
Anyone care to share a tried and true recipe?  Anybody know what's happened
to the "Cat's Meow" type book of mead recipes that was to be distributed?

--
Mike Lindner
x2017

------------------------------

Subject: Re: Mead Lover's Digest #287, 4 April 1994
From: ewagoner@nmt.edu (A Hoopy Frood Who Always Knows Where His Towel Is)
Date: Tue, 5 Apr 1994 12:10:11 -0600

Does anyone have nice recipes for one gallon batches
of blackberry and rhubarb meads?

Thanks,
eric
ewagoner@nmt.edu


-- 

Today's sign of hidden brain damage:

I often mistake my hands for food.

------------------------------

Subject: administrivia
From: rcd@raven.eklektix.com (Dick Dunn)
Date: 6 Apr 94 22:20:10 MDT (Wed)

As we see more commercial interest in the Internet and mailing lists that
float across it, there's been an occasional question about whether I give
out the Digest list.  The answer is NO in both a theoretical and practical
sense.  The only mailings you'll get on account of this list will be issues
of the Digest itself, and the actual list name is shrouded here (mainly to
catch misguided mail programs), so you shouldn't expect any "junk mail" on
account of MLD.  In a practical sense, nobody's ever asked for access to
the list, nor tried to send advertising via the list, since I took over...
so it's moot.  Whether that's good (because we've escaped it) or bad
(because we're obscure) I leave to your judgment.
_ _ _ _ _

I'm thinking of sending out a short reader-survey in a future issue, to
give us an idea of who we are--things like how you found us, whether/how
much mead you make, types of mead, etc.  It might give people a better idea
of who they're talking to when they submit articles.  Let me know if you'd
like to see such a survey or not, and if so, what sorts of things you'd
like to see in the questions.
_ _ _ _ _

next, one of my sporadic pleas to make my job easier...

If you use a "vacation mailer", please try to ensure that it does not
respond to "-request" addresses, AND that it examines the correct part
of a mail header--"From:", not "From " nor "Reply-To:"--to decide whether
to send a vacation reply.  (If this doesn't all make sense, you might
ask your site admin to check.)

This will save you the embarrassment of announcing to 450 people, most of
whom don't really care at all, that you're going on vacation (if I fail to
catch the errant submission).  The headers on Digest articles are set as
carefully as possible when they leave here to prevent error messages and
vacation replies from getting back into the Digest, but I can only do so
much; I hope for well-behaved mail handling at your end to make it all work.

thanks,
Mead-Lover's Digest                     mead-lovers-request@eklektix.com
Dick Dunn, Digest Coordinator                     Boulder, Colorado  USA

------------------------------

End of Mead Lover's Digest #288
