Subject: Mead Lover's Digest #303, 12 May 1994
From: mead-lovers-request@eklektix.com


Mead Lover's Digest #303                                  12 May 1994

            Forum for Discussion of Mead Making and Consuming
                      Dick Dunn, Digest Coordinator

Contents:
  vintage honey ("Daniel F McConnell")
  Tej ("Larry Lynch-Freshner")
  Priming with Honey? (SPEAKER.CURTIS)
  Yeast nutrients in Mead (Mark Ottenberg)
  Aging Mead (John DeCarlo              x7116)

Send ONLY articles for the digest to mead-lovers@eklektix.com.
Use mead-lovers-request@eklektix.com for subscribe, unsubscribe, and admin
    requests.  When subscribing, please include your name and a good address
    in the message body unless you're sure your mailer generates them.
There is an FTP archive of the digest on sierra.stanford.edu in pub/mead.
    If you have email access but not ftp, it will accept "listserv" requests.
    Send email with message "help" to listserv@sierra.stanford.edu.

------------------------------

Subject: vintage honey
From: "Daniel F McConnell" <Daniel.F.McConnell@med.umich.edu>
Date: 11 May 1994 14:15:14 -0400

Subject:  vintage honey

Robb Harris asks about old honey:

>I also started a batch 2 weeks ago using S. Californian honey my father
>raised.  The honey is about 17 years old, and taste fine when it was added.
>Are their any +'s or -'s to using old honey?

Here is some information on enzyme content and storage of honey.  Most 
of the information was taken from Eva Crane's book and a USDA Technical 
bulletin by Jonathan White.  The bottom line is that if the honey was not 
stored at or below 0 F the character has certainly changed.  I am sure that 
it will still make mead, and perhaps since this stuff in not _just_ old, 
but _vintage_, the mead character will be very unique.  So FWIW.....


ENZYMES
Enzymes are very critical ingredients in honey. The sucrose contained in 
floral nectar is converted into dextrose and levulose (the invert sugars)
by the enzyme invertase, also known as saccharase or sucrase. Invertase 
activity is believed to begin in the bee, and continues indefinitely 
barring excessive heat exposure. Diastase is also present in honey, along 
with glucose oxidase, catalase and phosphatases.

STORAGE AND STABILITY
Honey is not widely considered to be a fragile substance, but for the 
purposes of brewing, it should be considered as such. The volatility of 
the aroma constituents makes pasteurization an unappealing option, 
and there are a number of other problems which can result from age 
and improper storage.

>From the time the honey is produced by the bee, its constitution is in 
a constant state of change. Invertase is continually working on the 
sucrose content to convert it to levulose. There is additional evidence 
to indicate that as much as 9% of the dextrose may be converted to 
more complex sugars, thus changing the balance of levulose to dextrose.
Additionally, gluconic acid is a primary by-product of the invertase 
conversion process, and other acids may be added to the blend as the
result of additional enzymatic activity. Some honeys have an 
appreciable increase in acid content during storage. Diastase, due to 
its own instability, will tend to decrease in storage, and color in 
virtually all honey stored at room temperature will darken.

Perhaps the most hazardous of all storage problems is granulation 
or crystallization. Honey granulates by building up dextrose around 
a "crystal nucleus" of a dextrose crystal, dust particle or pollen 
grain, and will crystallize most rapidly when stored at temperatures 
between 50 F and 60 F, (the optimal temperature for initialization of 
crystallization is 41 F to 45 F). Crystallization is particularly 
hazardous to unpasteurized honey because the concentration of solids 
around the crystal creates a higher moisture content (above the 
critical 18 - 19% level) in the residual uncrystallized honey. This in 
turn promotes fermentation, resulting in alcohol and, in the presence 
of oxygen, the alcohol will break down to acetic acid and water. If 
crystallization is present, and a distinct separation of solids and 
liquids is apparent, your honey is at distinct risk of fermentation. 
The end result is honey which is sour and definitely not conducive to 
premium mead creation.  The moral of the story is, don't buy your 
honey in August, put it in the basement at 55 degrees for months, and 
then haul it out and brew with it when its old and crystallized.

All of these problems can be avoided through immediate use of fresh 
honey, or through proper storage of your honey. The ideal temperature 
for long term storage is 0 F or below, as honey kept at very low 
temperatures, even for prolonged periods, shows little or no degradation 
of flavor, color, aroma or its other physical properties. If freezing is 
not an option, short term storage between 61 F and 80 F is the best 
option, and storage above 80 F will cause particularly rapid deterioration 
of color, flavor and enzyme content.

DanMcC

------------------------------

Subject: Tej
From: "Larry Lynch-Freshner" <Larry_Lynch-Freshner@taligent.com>
Date: 11 May 1994 11:17:39 -0800

Tej
About 2 years ago, I got a recipe for Tej from the owner of a local (now
defunct) Eretreian (sp?) resteraunt.  The owner made here own Tej, and sold it
(probably illegally) in the place.  I'm still madly looking for it to post
here, but I do remember a few details.  It was sweet, consumed after only a
few weeks.  It had hops, but was not boiled, so they were for flavor, not
bitterness (thus the distiction from mead ale).  I also remember that it was
fairly cloudy.  

Still Looking...
Larry

------------------------------

Subject: Priming with Honey?
From: CSS2@OAS.PSU.EDU     (SPEAKER.CURTIS)
Date: Wed, 11 May 1994 15:52 EDT

I'm thinking about trying to make me next batch of mead sparkling...Has anyone
tried priming mead at bottling time with honey instead of corn sugar?  What
would be the appropriate amount for a 5 gal. batch?  I've heard some
beermakers on the "other" digest say that they use 1/3 cup for 5
gallons...Does that sound about right?  Would more make a sweeter mead, or
just overcarbonate it?  Does it take longer to develop carbonation (given the
amount of time mead spends in the bottle, I hardly think that this is an
issue)?  Any advice on this subject would be greatly appreciated; private
email is welcome...:)
Curt Speaker
css2@oas.psu.edu

------------------------------

Subject: Yeast nutrients in Mead
From: Mark Ottenberg <marko@cap.gwu.edu>
Date: Wed, 11 May 1994 20:56:31 -0400 (EDT)

Greetings Sean:
Yup!  Get some yeast nutrients!!  Yeast beasties seem to need nutrients
that honey alone cannot well provide.  My first batch of mead was made
without the benefit of nutrients.  Geologic is a good description of the
time span on this one.  I eventually wised up and added nutrients, acid,
etc and after a quick finish, finally bottled after a combined year!  Now
I have to let it age probably between 6 mo and another year! 
 
>From what I understand and am finding, with nutrients etc, etc, meads can
finish primary fermentation in as little as a month and be ready for
bottling in about 3 months.

Nitrients can also keep your yeasties from pooping out.  My first batch
did just that, but when I added nutrients, it sprang back to furious life
and moved right along!!

Welcome to the world of mead brewing!!

                                    -- Mark

------------------------------

Subject: Aging Mead
From: John DeCarlo              x7116           <jdecarlo@homebrew.mitre.org>
Date: Thu, 12 May 94 08:17:27 EST

Robb S. Harris writes:
>Also, have any of you aged mead in gallon volumes?  I have some antique
>1 gal jugs that will hold a wine cork.  I know that bigger quanities 
>(22oz.  bottles compaired to 12oz.  bottles) will help in better aging.
>If I use these I will probably have to bottle the mead without
>carbonation, I don't think the corks would hold otherwise.

Hmmm.

I guess it depends on what you mean by aging mead.  I have only aged 
mead in 5 gallon carboys (15 months before bottling).  Hey, if you have 
the space, carboys are relatively cheap.  Of course, my mead is now in 
the bottle four months and I will keep some around awhile and it will 
continue to age.  Still, I think it worthwhile to consider aging it in 
bulk over a year before bottling.

You are right that bottles not built for carbonated beverages are unsafe
for carbonated beverages--not built to withstand the pressure.  Either 
the cork will come out or the bottle will break.

John DeCarlo, MITRE Corporation, McLean, VA--My views are my own
Fidonet:  1:109/131  Internet:  jdecarlo@mitre.org

------------------------------

End of Mead Lover's Digest #303
