Subject: Mead Lover's Digest #359, 31 October 1994
From: mead-lovers-request@eklektix.com


Mead Lover's Digest #359                                  31 October 1994

            Forum for Discussion of Mead Making and Consuming
                      Dick Dunn, Digest Janitor

Contents:
  Morse sources? (Kelvin Kapteyn)
  Clovegilly mead, pt. 2 (Joyce Miller)
  Fast Mead (Thomas_Fotovich-U2347@email.mot.com)

Send ONLY articles for the digest to mead-lovers@eklektix.com.
Use mead-lovers-request@eklektix.com for subscribe, unsubscribe, and admin
    requests.  When subscribing, please include your name and a good address
    in the message body unless you're sure your mailer generates them.
There is an FTP archive of the digest on sierra.stanford.edu in pub/mead.
    If you have email access but not ftp, it will accept "listserv" requests.
    Send email with message "help" to listserv@sierra.stanford.edu.

------------------------------

Subject: Morse sources?
From: Kelvin Kapteyn <kelvink@mtu.edu>
Date: Tue, 25 Oct 94 14:33:39 EDT

Howdy,

   I would like to get the book "Making Mead" by Roger Morse.  Being the 
cheapskate that I am, I thought I'd ask for suggestions as to the cheapest 
place to get this.  Any ideas?  TIA,

-Kelvin

-- 
Kelvin  Kapteyn         (kelvink@mtu.edu)

------------------------------

Subject: Clovegilly mead, pt. 2
From: jmiller@genome.wi.mit.edu (Joyce Miller)
Date: Wed, 26 Oct 1994 09:34:59 -0400

Kenelme Digbie, 1669:

        Upon tryal of several ways, I conclude (as things yet appear to me)
that to keep Meath long, it must not be fermented with yest (unless you put
Hops to it) but put it in the barrel, and let it ferment of it self,
keeping a thick plate of lead upon the bung, to lie close upon it, yet so
that the working of the Liquor may raise it, to purge out the foulness, and
have always some new made plain Liquor, to fill it up as it sinks, warm
whiles it works: but cold during three or four month's after.  Then stop
the bung exceeding close.  And when you will make your Mead with Cherries
or Morello-Cherries, or Raspes, or Bilberries, or Black cherries, put their
juyce to the Liquor when you tun it, without ever boiling it therein; about
one quart of juyce to every three or four gallons of Liquor.  You may
squeese out the clear juyce, and mingle it with the Liquor, and hang the
Magma in a bag in the bung.  I think it is best to break the stones of the
Cherries, before you put their Magma into the bag.
        Since I conceive, that Clove-gilly-flowers must never be boiled in
the Liquor: that evaporateth their Spirits, which are very volatile: But
make a strong infusion of them, and besides hang a bag of them in the bung.
In conceive that it is good to make the Liquor pretty strong (not too
much, but so as the taste may be gratefull) of some strong herbs, as
Rosemary, Bay-leaves, Sweet-marjoram, Thyme, Broad-thyme, and the like.
For they preserve the drink, and make it better for the stomach and head.
Sanding in the Sun is the best way of Fermentation, when the drink is
strong.  The Root of Angelica or Elecampane, or Eringo, or Orris, may be
good and pleasant, to be boiled in the Liquor.  Raspes and Cherries and
Bilberies are never to be boiled, but their juyce put into the Liquor, when
it is tunning.  Use onely Morello-Cherries (I think) for pleasure, and
blackones for health.  I conceive it best to use very little spice of any
kind in Meathes.
- end -

------------------------------

Subject: Fast Mead
From: Thomas_Fotovich-U2347@email.mot.com
Date: 28 Oct 94 13:23:00 -0500

     In several previous posts, there have been references to a "quick" 
     mead (i.e., mead ready to consume within four weeks).  Being the 
     inquisitive impatient being I am, I tried to make said mead.
     
     Here is the recipe:
     
     8 lb. honey (local stuff from the Tennessee Valley)
     5 gallons water
     3 oz. cinnamon (dried)
     2 oz. ginger (dried)
     2 oz. glove (dried)
     1 oz. nutmeg (dried)
     yeast drudges left over from primary ferminter of an ipa
     (YeastLab's British Ale #2)
     (Sorry no og, forgot to check 8-()
     
     Tuesday night:
     Added honey to carboy.  Added two gallons of water and shook.  Added 
     two more gallons of water, spices, and shook.  Shook.  Shook.  
     Shook....  Added yeast and topped with water of to make 5 gallons.  
     Shook.
     
     Wednesday and Thursday night:
     Airlock percolating like a mad man.
     
     
     That's it.  From what I have read, adding yeast nutrient and using 
     champagne yeast is the alleged cause for the "long" aging delay.  I'm 
     hoping to bottle mid-November and drink by Thanksgiving.
     
     Two outstanding questions:
     
       1)  Just how important is boiling the honey (my apologies to Mr. 
     Digbie)?
     
       2)  When should the spices be added?  Will I lose flavor to CO2 
     scrubbing?  
     
     
     I'll keep the digest posted on the various details as they progress.
     
     
     Paddy "The Mead Hatter" Fotovich
     u2347@email.mot.com
     
     
     p.s.  Any ideas as to the og?

------------------------------

End of Mead Lover's Digest #359
