Subject: Cider Digest #1617, 5 March 2011
From: cider-request@talisman.com




Cider Digest #1617                                         5 March 2011


                 Cider and Perry Discussion Forum


Contents:
  Fwd: cider shops in bay area (Lauren Shepard)
  RE; What's so special about grapes? On last time (lotic@juno.com)
  Exploding bottles during water bath pasteurization followup (Joseph Conway)
  Great Lakes International Cider & Perry Competition ("Gary Awdey")


NOTE: Digest appears whenever there is enough material to send one.
Send ONLY articles for the digest to cider@talisman.com.
Use cider-request@talisman.com for subscribe/unsubscribe/admin requests.
Archives of the Digest are available at www.talisman.com/cider#Archives
Digest Janitor: Dick Dunn
----------------------------------------------------------------------


Subject: Fwd: cider shops in bay area
From: Lauren Shepard <lauren@sheltonbrothers.com>
Date: Thu, 3 Mar 2011 11:38:50 -0700


Hello Cider Digest,


Regarding Al's question:
Subject: Artisan cider outlets in the Bay Area?
From: Alan Yelvington <alany@semparpac.org>
Date: Thu, 24 Feb 2011 12:07:05 -0500


I have a friend in the SF Bay area that is
looking for artisan cider for sale in the area.


Anybody out there have any leads on outlets
that I could pass along?  She lives in Walnut
Creek...


Thanks,


Al


Our Shelton Brothers representative in San Francisco has some suggestions
for good places to find quality cider in the Bay Area:


Beer Revolution in Oakland has a good amount and will order more if someone
asks (ask for Rebecca)
Berkeley Bowl West Heinz has a good amount and will also order more if
people ask (ask for Simon)
K&L in Redwood City has the most (ask for Bryan).


Cheers,
Lauren


*Lauren Shepard*
*Shelton Brothers Importers*
*Office: 720-897-7086*
*Cell: 413-230-0275*
*www.sheltonbrothers.com*


------------------------------


Subject: RE; What's so special about grapes? On last time
From: lotic@juno.com
Date: Thu, 3 Mar 2011 16:12:06 -0500


Dear Rkreeves,
Thank you for commenting on my rant. Also, thank you for the links. My
cider is 8% ABV. Thus, it is considered a "wine" by the TTB. I make it 8%
for a couple of reasons. I shall not go into those reasons now, and I am
reconsidering them IF that will allow me to use sulfites and make at
least some "organic" statement on the label. However, it seems
particularly sleazy to lower my ETOH just to skirt around this rule
(especially since lowering ETOH also lowers shelf-life).


For those who may also be up against this issue, I suggest they view the
memo that got this thing rolling in the first place:


http://www.ams.usda.gov/AMSv1.0/getfile?dDocName=STELPRDC5086671


The pithy bit reads, "Because the NOP regulations specify "grapes" in
this annotation, the use of sulfur dioxide in other true fruit wines
(i.e. those that are made with organic fruit other than grapes), and
which are labeled, "made with organically grown (fruit other than
grapes)", is prohibited.".


So, a clerical omission is the result of my problems. True, the vast
majority of "wine" consumed in the world is made from grapes. So, using
grapes as an EXAMPLE makes sense. Also, listing every single fruit that
can be fermented would be nuts (we're talking several pages of listings).
I'm sorry, but I have to call "BS" on this Policy Memorandum. Note that
this was NOT voted on by the NOP board. It is a lawyers interpretation of
a previous example listing - There is no scientific or public health
issue cited. As such, there is still time to rectify this situation.


The USDA-NOSB (National Organic Standards Board) will be meeting on April
26-29 at the Red Lion Hotel in Seattle WA. On the USDA-NOP website
www.ams.usda.gov/NOSB  , there will soon be the opportunity to publicly
comment on this issue (and any other organic issue). I cannot afford to
get to Seattle and comment in person.


Please note that there is currently a petition before the NOSB from grape
wine fermenters to go beyond the exclusionary privileges they already
have. They wish to use sulfites and simply state "organic"on their label.
Instead of "Made with organic grapes". (yeah, that stings a bit)


All I seek is a level playing field - equality of opportunity. That which
applies to one wine should apply to all. If it is the boards decision to
rule that NO ONE can use sulfites, then so be it. But, if they decide
that sulfites should be permitted, then they should be permitted for all.
This is exactly what applies in Canada, Britain, and the E.U.. It would
be much easier for importers if a single rule applied. BTW- those
countries listed above allow up to 200ppm SO2 (the USA allows 100ppm).


Ok, I've flogged this dead horse to the bone. I'm going to submit written
comments to the USDA-NOSB as this issue is still very much "on the
table". I ask that you all do so as well.


Thanks again,
Peter Mitchell


PS- It's time to get your grafting gear and scion wood together. Bark
slip will come sooner than we think.


------------------------------


Subject: Exploding bottles during water bath pasteurization followup
From: Joseph Conway <jmccider@hotmail.com>
Date: Thu, 3 Mar 2011 16:21:10 -0700


This is a question related to one that appeared a few issues ago about
exploding bottles during pasteurization. Leaving too little headspace in a
bottle can cause that because the liquid expands and if there is no room
to expand the bottle will burst. It would be useful to know what kind of
pressures are building up in the bottle during pasteruization if there
is sufficient headspace. One could then determine the strength of the
bottle required.


I wonder if any of the cider makers on this list have come up with a way
to determine what the pressure in the bottle will rise to at the highest
temperature reached in the hot water bath. So for those who like practical
physics, here's an example:


Say the final amount of CO2 dissolved in the cider at bottling is 2.0
volumes of CO2.  The highest temperature for pasteurization reaches 64
degrees C in the bottle.


Q: What is the pressure in the bottle at this temp?


I suspect that the amount of air space in the bottle may be a factor but
I'm not sure.  I'm also curious as to what volumes of CO2 cider makers
out there are shooting for (bubble tax may be an issue).


Thanks,
Joe Conway
Erie, CO                                    


------------------------------


Subject: Great Lakes International Cider & Perry Competition
From: "Gary Awdey" <gawdey@comcast.net>
Date: Fri, 4 Mar 2011 22:09:24 -0600


On behalf of the membership and the board of directors of the Association
and on behalf of our esteemed competition organizer and dedicated volunteers
I am pleased to announce the call for entries for the Sixth Annual Great
Lakes International Cider & Perry Competition (GLINTCAP).


This uniquely inclusive competition is open to nineteen categories of apple
and pear fermentation beverages, ranging from historically traditional to
whimsically creative.  There are separate divisions for commercial producers
(those with license to sell their products) and noncommercial producers.
Judging will take place in Grand Rapids, Michigan, on April 2, 2011.
Please note that entries must be received by the deadline of March 25, 2011.


In addition to our panel of returning judges this year we are happy to
include some well known faces from outside the region.  Ben Watson, author
of Cider: Hard and Sweet and co-author of The Slow Food Guide to New York,
will be visiting from his New England home in Francestown, New Hampshire.
The Cider Digest's own Dick Dunn, principal author of the current BJCP
cider style guidelines, will be coming from his home at the base of
the foothills of the Rocky Mountains in Hygiene, Colorado.  Dave White,
known for his Old Time Cider blog (including the rapidly expanding North
American Cider Map Project) will be visiting from his Pacific Northwest
home in the State of Washington.


As in past years, we are happy to have entrants participate in the judging
(Saturday, April 2) and pre-competition judges' workshop (Friday, April 1).
The workshop is free to all volunteers and judges.  Judges are invited
to attend every year to continue learning and help others to learn.
Judging is blind and as usual no one will be permitted to judge his or her
own entries.  Those who have participated in the past have found it to be
very interesting and worthwhile.  We welcome our entrants' participation
and continued feedback in making this a competition with expanding artisanal
and geographical relevance.


Competition details and entry material may be found at
www.greatlakescider.com.   If you have questions or concerns after reading
these details they may be addressed to competition organizer Rex Halfpenny
at 248-628-6584 (mibeerguyd@aol.com) or lead registrar Jeff Carlson at
616-331-2127  (carlsonj@gvsu.edu).  Questions about international shipping
may be addressed to Gary Awdey at +00-1-219-921-4973 (gawdey@comcast.net).


The competition also marks this year's membership drive for the Great
Lakes Cider & Perry Association, a nonprofit organization dedicated to
promoting cider and perry and to providing oppportunities for consumers
and producers alike to learn more about these beverages.  We encourage
cider and perry makers to browse the Association's new website and take
this opportunity to become a member.


Gary Awdey
President, Great Lakes Cider & Perry Association
www.greatlakescider.com


------------------------------


End of Cider Digest #1617
*************************