Return-Path: postmaster at lance.colostate.edu
Received: from srvr8.engin.umich.edu (root at srvr8.engin.umich.edu [141.212.2.81]) by srvr5.engin.umich.edu (8.7.5/8.7.3) with ESMTP id PAA00359 for <spencer at srvr5.engin.umich.edu>; Wed, 12 Jun 1996 15:28:04 -0400 (EDT)
Received: from twins.rs.itd.umich.edu (twins.rs.itd.umich.edu [141.211.83.39]) by srvr8.engin.umich.edu (8.7.4/8.7.3) with ESMTP id PAA10112 for <spencer at engin.umich.edu>; Wed, 12 Jun 1996 15:28:03 -0400 (EDT)
Received: by twins.rs.itd.umich.edu (8.7.5/2.2)
        with X.500 id PAA02357; Wed, 12 Jun 1996 15:28:02 -0400 (EDT)
Received: from longs.lance.colostate.edu by twins.rs.itd.umich.edu (8.7.5/2.2)
        with SMTP id PAA02342; Wed, 12 Jun 1996 15:28:00 -0400 (EDT)
Received: (daemon at localhost) by longs.lance.colostate.edu (8.6.12/8.6.5a (LANCE Revision: 1.3)) id LAA09251 for reallambic at longs.lance.colostate.edu; Wed, 12 Jun 1996 11:43:27 -0600
Date: Wed, 12 Jun 1996 11:43:27 -0600
Message-Id: <199606121743.LAA09251 at longs.lance.colostate.edu>
From: lambic-request at lance.colostate.edu (subscription requests only - do not post here)
To: lambic at lance.colostate.edu
Reply-to: lambic at lance.colostate.edu (postings only - do not send subscription requests here)
Errors-to: lambic-request at lance.colostate.edu
Subject: Lambic Digest #868 (June 12, 1996)






Lambic Digest #868                             Wed 12 June 1996




        Forum on Lambic Beers (and other Belgian beer styles)
                Mike Sharp, Digest Coordinator




Contents:
  AHA Talk part 6 (Jim Liddil)
  AHA Talk Part 7 (Jim Liddil)
  AHA Talk Part 8 (Jim Liddil)




Send article submissions only to: lambic at longs.lance.colostate.edu
Send all other administrative requests (subscribe/unsubscribe/change) to:
     lambic-request at longs.lance.colostate.edu
Note that the request address is not an automated server.  It forwards
to a real person who may not be able to process the request immediately.
Subscription changes often take 2-5 days, sometimes more.
 
Back issues are available by mail; send empty message with subject 'HELP' to:
     netlib at longs.lance.colostate.edu
Phil Seitz' series on Brewing Belgian Beer is available; the index
     from the archives lists individual topics and the complete set.
     Start with the help message above then request the index.
A FAQ is also available by netlib; say 'send faq from lambic' as the
     subject or body of your message (to netlib at longs.lance.colostate.edu).


----------------------------------------------------------------------


Date: Tue, 11 Jun 1996 7:43:34 -0700 (MST)
From: Jim Liddil <JLIDDIL at AZCC.Arizona.EDU>
Subject: AHA Talk part 6


Oak Barrels


The vessel used by traditional lambic brewers to ferment
their beer in is the  European oak barrel.  Oak barrels are
considered the ultimate vessel by many  homebrewers making
lambic-style beers.  The oak barrels used by lambic brewers 
are generally used wine barrels of European origin.  They
have had the majority of  tannins and other wood related
compounds leached out of them by wine  fermentation. The
traditional lambic brewer has various barrels, many of which
are  quite old, with the size usually being 600 liters or
so.


The advantage of an oak cask over other vessels is that it
provides a  microenvironment where the various yeast and
bacteria can grow.  This is due to the  porous nature of the
wood, which provides nooks and crannies for the 
microorganisms to inhabit.(20)  The permeability allows the
slow diffusion of air into  the fermenting wort and this may
further aid the growth of the microorganisms as  well as
flavor development.  After a cask has been used for a number
of batches it  will become, one hopes, infected with the
right microflora further aiding in the  production of a more
authentic product.


It also seems that as a cask is used for many years the
various flavors from previous  batches of beer as well as
those from the yeast and bacteria build up in the wood  and
further add to the complex flavor profile of each successive
fermentation.  It is  felt by some that even old oak adds a
certain minor astringent note to the lambic  from the
remaining tannins that are slowly leached from the wood.


The homebrewer has to consider a number of things before
obtaining an oak barrel.   One has to consider the size, the
type of oak (American or European), where to put it  and
whether to get a new or used one.  First let s look at the
type of oak barrel to  buy.  Regardless of whether you
choose to buy a barrel made of American or  European oak,
make sure it is a wine barrel that is uncoated.  Do not buy
a whiskey  barrel as they are charred on the inside and
really only meant for making whiskey.   Do you really want
that burnt wood flavor in your lambic-style beer?  Your best
bet is  to buy the barrel from a cooperage rather than
through a homebrew supplier.  That  way you can get
specifically what you want and also save some money.  


It is generally felt that European oak is superior to
American oak.  This is based on  the fact that American oak
trees and European oak trees are different species (21).  
This leads to them having different profiles of the various
compounds that are  extracted during the fermentation
process.  The grain structure and thus porosity of  the two
species is also different.  It is felt that American oak is
too  oaky  as  compared to European oak.  There is some
truth to this, but in the past few years  things have
changed (22).  Part of the problem with too much  oakiness 
in  American barrels has to do with the way the wood is
dried and aged.  European  cooperages have traditionally
aged their wood for at least 2 years before it is used to 
make barrels.  During this drying and aging process many of
the  oaky  compounds  are volatilized from the wood.  


American cooperages on the other hand quite often oven dry
the wood in a matter of  days and then used it to make
barrels.  This leads to an over abundance of oak  character
left in the wood.  Some cooperages still use this method for
their less  expensive barrels.  Others have started to
follow European practice and are aging  their wood for
extended periods.  Unfortunately most of the cooperages in
America  that age their oak don t make barrels in any size
less than 200 L.  If you are looking  for a barrel of 5-15
gallons you will probably have to do some calling around to
see if  you can find a barrel in stock made of aged wood. 
Small barrels are not kept in  stock by many cooperages
because demand is relatively small.  Also it is no surprise 
that many of the cooperages are in California due to the
large wine industry there.  


Another factor to consider is the cost of European vs.
American oak.  The majority of  European oak barrels come
out of France and currently the franc is pretty weak.  An 
investigation of prices for barrels revealed that most
European barrels cost almost  twice as much as equivalent
American barrels.  If cost is no object and you are in the 
market for a new wine barrel then of course go ahead and buy
a barrel of European  origin.


If you choose to buy an American barrel make sure it is a
wine barrel.  Again try to  find one that is made from air
dried wood, preferably of a year old or more.  Also get  the
barrel with a medium  toast   This is a process where the
insides of the staves of  the barrels have been lightly
browned but not charred as with a whiskey barrel.  This  is
done to barrels that are destined for red wine production
since it further reduces  the tannins and oakiness of the
wood.  Since a barrel is a major investment ask to  speak to
a cooper about how to prepare the barrel.  Ask what will be
done if the  barrel fails to hold water when you fill it. 
Will they exchange it for a new one?  Most  cooperages have
people on staff willing to discuss how to prepare a barrel
and are  willing to provide an exchange for a leaky barrel. 
If you buy a barrel from reputable  cooperage leaking should
not be a problem anyway.  Barrels come in a range of  sizes
starting at around 3 gallons and going up to 50 gallons or
more.  Typically  though, European barrels do not come in
sizes smaller than 25 liters.  


If you choose to buy a barrel remember that it is going to
have liquid in it for a year  or more.  It will need to be
in an environment that does not freeze or exceed 80 F  (27
C) as these are the general extremes in temperature
encountered in Belgium.  A  barrel full of beer is going to
weigh 8.3 lb./gallon of liquid plus the weight of the 
barrel.  If you choose to buy a 10 gallon or larger cask
think about the logistics of  filling and storing it ahead
of time. Due to the weight you may need a hoist or a few 
strong friends to lift it.  Also be sure you have the
brewing capacity to fill the barrel.   It is not a good idea
to partially fill the barrel. This may lead to drying of the
staves  and leakage.  


The price of a barrel does not increase linearly with size. 
Typically a 10 gallon one  is only about $20-30 more than a
5 gallon size.  This holds true whether you buy  American or
European.  Most of the cooperages selling American oak
barrels  designate the size by the gallon capacity whereas
the dealers of European barrels  designate size by the
liter.  This is just another point to consider when
investigating a  purchase.  


Another source of barrels is previously used ones.  Many
wineries in the US use 200  or 225 Liter European barrels
and you can pick them up for around $50 used.  This 
requires you live near a winery and that you have the
brewing capacity to fill it and  the storage space.  Many
wineries only use the barrels for 3-4 years before selling 
them.  The trend toward using barrels for a shorter time has
come about due to the  decreasing use of sulfites and the
increased risk of Brettanomyces infection this can  bring
about.  Thus you can get a barrel in really good shape for
an excellent price.   Unfortunately finding used barrels of
smaller sizes is not so easy.  Wineries and  cooperages that
deal in used barrels usually do not have anything other than
200- 225L sizes.  It seems wineries do use the smaller sizes
to keep wine in that is used  to make up the ullage in the
big casks.  But they use these small casks until they are 
ready to be used as fire wood.  So if you find someone with
a used 5 or 10 gallon  barrel for sale that is in good shape
consider yourself lucky.  Another source of used  barrels
maybe home wine makers who might be getting rid of a used
cask.  Finally  note there is a company that is
reconditioning the larger used barrels and downsizing  them
to 30 gallons.  (See Barrel Supplier List)


Some people warn that any beer made in an American Oak
barrel will taste like an  oak branch.  They also feel that
it will take numerous batches of beer to extract all  the
oakiness from the wood.  You will have to make a personal
decision regarding  American vs. European Oak.  Regardless
of what you buy you want the majority of  the oak character
removed from it prior to using it.  The quality of a
European barrel  is not necessarily twice as good as an
American one either.  Any barrel, if well cared  for will
last for decades.  To reduce the chances of oak beer you
will want to buy  either a used barrel or a new one that is
made from air dried wood with a medium  toast interior.  


Regardless of the source any new barrel is going to have a
certain degree of oak  character that will be imparted to
the beer.  This is particularly true in the making of 
lambic-style beer, where the wort stays in the barrel for a
long period of time.  During  this time period a great
amount of chemical compounds can be extracted out of the 
wood.  So it is suggested that you chemically strip the
barrel.  When you first get the  barrel you will need to
swell it with water to make it liquid tight.  It is at this
stage  when you find out if the barrel is of good quality or
not.  At first you will need to top  up the barrel daily as
the wood swells and absorbs water.  It may leak some at
first,  but should stop after 3-5 days.  Once a good quality
barrel has been swelled it  should show no further signs of
leakage unless damaged.


To maximize the amount of oak compounds leached out of the
wood change the  water in the barrel every three days for
two weeks.  This also ensures no mold will  grow in it.  If
you live in an area that has high humidity you may want to
add  metabisulfite from the start at the rate of 200 PPM. 
After two weeks of soaking start  the chemical stripping
process to really remove the oakiness.  This is done by 
adding sodium carbonate (washing soda) to the cask at the
rate of 1/2 ounce/gallon  and letting it soak for a week. 
Then drain the cask, rinse it well and repeat the  process. 
To maximize the extraction repeat this process for 4 to 6
weeks.  At this  point the water in the barrel should be
clear when drained as compared to the tan  liquid when you
start the process.  Next neutralize any residual sodium
carbonate by  adding citric acid to the cask full of water
to drop the pH to 3 and let it set for a few  days.  Then
rinse it well and fill it with metabisulfite solution to
inhibit mold growth  until you can brew and fill it with
wort.


Following this stripping procedure can help you reduce the
chances of having  multiple batches of oaky beer.  If you
get the right barrel and are careful to strip it  thoroughly
there is no reason not to use a barrel of American origin. 
Besides, even  a European barrel will need to be stripped to
some extent to reduce the oakiness that  is present in any
new unused barrel.


So now you have a barrel and it has been full of beer for a
year or two and you want  to bottle the beer.  What do you
do with the barrel once it is empty?  First you should 
never leave a barrel that has held liquid empty for any
period of time as it will dry out  and shrink.  This may
lead to leakage that will not ever stop.  Sometimes a leak
can  be stopped by hammering the steel bands of the barrel
closer to the center.  You will  be better off if this can
be avoided.  


Since lambic-style beer takes so long to ferment and age,
when you bottle is not  very critical.  You will be better
off if you coordinate when you will empty the cask for 
bottling to a time when you can brew a new batch to fill the
cask up again  immediately.  For example, the day you are
brewing you can transfer the contents of  the barrel to a
carboy(s) or other holding vessel leaving as much of the
lees behind  as possible.  This will allow the beer a chance
to settle until you are ready to bottle  anyway.  Then you
can rinse the cask out with water and have it all ready to
fill when  your wort is cooled.  This way there is no chance
of the cask drying out and all the  microflora in the wood
remain intact and happy.  If you must empty the barrel and 
cannot fill it immediately, rinse it with water and burn a
sulfur candle in it and bung it  up tightly or fill it with
metabisulfite solution.  Then when you have time to brew
rinse  the cask well and fill it with wort.


A barrel is a major investment and can be ruined if it gets
moldy on the inside.  Thus  it is important to keep it
filled up close to the top at all times.  This requires
making  up the ullage at regular intervals depending on the
dryness of where you live.  Also  as previously stated, when
there is not beer in the cask keep it filled with 
metabisulfite solution.  Do not use bleach or iodophor as
these would likely taint the  wood and kill all microflora
present in the wood.  


The outside of the cask also requires regular attention. 
Again depending on where  you live the outer surface may
develop mold over time.  You can spray the outside  of the
cask with metabisulfite at regular intervals or whenever you
see signs of mold  developing.  Some people use a 200 PPM
bleach solution or 25 PPM iodophor.   These are probably OK
to use as long as you do not saturate the wood with them.  
Others favor applying linseed oil to the outside of the
cask.  The important thing is to  keep an eye on your
barrels and treat mold and mildew infections when they 
develop.  This is all part of taking care of a barrel so
that it will last for years.  It  would be a shame to have a
cask well infected with Brettanomyces and  Pediococcus,
ruined by mold.




Oak Chips The contribution of the oak from a cask to the
flavor of lambic is considered to be  minimal based on
discussion with various individuals.  This is due to the
fact that the  casks used are many times' decades old and
were previously used for wine  fermentation.  Thus they have
had the vast majority of tannins and phenolic  compounds
leached out of them.  This said, it is still felt by some
that the oak may  add some astringent quality to the lambic. 
If you feel that using oak may help  contribute complexity
to the flavor of your lambic-style ale but do not want to
deal  with a cask then you might want to consider using oak
chips.  The are usually  available from homebrew shops or
can be specially ordered.  It is suggested you use  toasted
chips and that you soak them in a couple of changes of
boiling water prior to  using them in the fermenter.  This
will help remove the majority of the oak flavor  compounds
from the wood.  You do not want beer that tastes like an
oaky  Chardonnay.  Preliminary experiments indicate that
after the chips have been  exposed to lambic-style ale the
microorganism do invade the pores of the wood.   This was
shown by taking the  infected  chips and washing them
thoroughly with  sterile water.  The chips were then added
to sterile wort from which Brettanomyces  and Pediococcus
could then be recovered.  Researchers have shown that the 
microorganisms do indeed invade the pores of the wood (20). 
This is another area  wide open for experimentation.


Bottling


There is some variation in the way lambic, particularly
gueuze, is bottled in Belgium  today.  Many of the brewers
artificially carbonate, sweeten and pasteurize their beer 
to produce a more consistent less aggressive product that
has a wider market  appeal.  In their beers the ratio of old
to young beer or top fermented ale is typically  not very
high.  The traditional brewers who make true refermented
gueuze also use  various ratios of young to old lambic, but
never normal top fermented beer.  The  method used by some
involves the mixing of 50% two year old or older lambic with 
50% young lambic of 6 to 12 months of age.(13)  The beer is
then bottled and  allowed to referment in the bottle for up
to two years prior to release.  The method  favored by the
Boon Brewery involves mixing 95% 2 year old lambic with 5%
2-3  month old lambic and then bottling.  Frank Boon prefers
this method due to the fact  that the 50/50 method can lead
to ropy and or hazy bottles that do not develop a 
consistent character.  This is not Brewing Art in his
opinion.  


Those of us in the US rarely have the luxury of being able
to mix young and old  lambic.  So we have to make due with
what works for our other brewing, that is using  priming
sugar of some sort.  Of course if you do happen to have
lambic-type ales of  various ages fermenting then of course
go ahead and try to blend and bottle them  and see what you
end up with.  Gueuze, being refermented in the bottle is
many  times fairly highly carbonated, though there are
examples that are nearly flat.  This is  part of the  Art 
and variability of the process.


The problem with conditioning a beer in the bottle that has
been fermenting so long  is that the number of viable carbon
dioxide producing organism may be very low.  If  this is the
case the beer may not become carbonated or only very
lightly.  To combat  this problem you may want to prepare a
fresh starter of Brettanomyces and/or  Saccharomyces at the
time of bottling.  Then you want to prime with enough sugar
to  end up with a fairly carbonated product.(2.5-3 volumes
CO2)  Using a cup of corn  sugar can lead to adequate
carbonation after as little as two months.  Other times 
there may be little carbonation after two years.  It would
not seem to be a good idea  to add Saccharomyces at the time
of bottling since they do not survive through the  lambic
fermentation process.(12)  But those of us who have looked
at what is in the  sediment of a recent Boon lambic have
discovered that the only yeast generally  recoverable is
indeed non-cyloheximide resistant yeast, most likely
Saccharomyces.   Boon fines his old lambic before adding the
young beer and in the early stage of the  ferment
Saccharomyces is the dominant strain.  Limited testing
indicates that this  yeast is indeed acid and alcohol
tolerant.


As with other aspects of this type of brewing, and with all
homebrewing for that  matter, you have a great deal of
latitude with bottling.  There are some things you  should
keep in mind though when you are considering transferring
your beer from  the fermentation vessel to bottles or other
serving containers.  If the beer has been  fermenting for a
year or longer the viability of the microorganisms in the
beer may  be low and/or may be predominantly bacteria and
not yeast.  If the viability of the  yeast is low and you
choose to bottle the beer unblended with corn sugar then you 
may get little carbonation of the product.  If the
predominant microorganisms present  are bacteria then they
will utilize the sugar before any yeast and again you will
get  little carbonation.  This is because the predominant
bacteria in an older lambic-style  ale will most likely be
of the homofermentative variety.(i.e. Pediococcus)  As 
described elsewhere, homofermentative bacteria do not
produce gas as they  metabolize sugars.  Again you can
possibly combat this problem by adding a fresh  starter of
Brettanomyces along with a heterofermentative lactobaccilus.
Apparently  there is a symbiosis between the yeast and
bacteria that can aid in carbonation. 


You can choose to put your beer into bottles using other
traditional techniques or  standard homebrewer methods.  You
can also put your beer into kegs or other  containers that
can be artificially carbonated, such as PET bottles using a 
Carbonater (TM) or TAP-CAP(TM).  You can also naturally
condition your beer in a  keg and then serve it using CO2.
The choice is up to you and you need to make  some decisions
regarding what you ultimately want to achieve.


Let s start with bottling, as it is still the traditional
technique used by lambic brewers  in Belgium.  As stated
before, as long as beer is fermenting in a vessel it is
called  lambic. When it is bottled and refermented it
becomes gueuze or one of the fruit  flavored derivatives. 
Of course we are not making real lambic, gueuze, Framboise 
or Kriek since our product does not meet all of the
qualifications of an authentic  product.  To make a
gueuze-like product the beer needs to be put into bottles
and  refermented in a fashion not unlike standard
homebrewing practice.  


If the beer is fairly old and has a thick pellicle of yeast
on the top and a large layer of  yeast at the bottom of the
vessel then you may want to consider racking the beer.  
Transfer the beer to another vessel, being careful to leave
as much of the top and  bottom layers behind as possible. 
Then you can let this beer settle for a week or so  prior to
bottling.  This technique allows you to minimize the amount
of sludge carried  over into the bottles.  Of course you do
not want a completely yeast free product as  it will then
fail to referment in the bottle after priming.  As stated
before one can run  into problems with lack of viable
microorganisms in the beer.  In a best case  scenario the
beer will still have adequate numbers of viable yeast even
after settling.   In that case you simply transfer the beer
once again to a bottling vessel and add  corn sugar (enough
to reach 2.5- 3 volumes CO2). Bottle it and wait for it to 
condition.  Sounds simple, but unfortunately lambic-style
beer making does not  always lend itself to simplicity,
especially when you are trying to make a product with  good
flavor complexity.


------------------------------


Date: Tue, 11 Jun 1996 7:47:16 -0700 (MST)
From: Jim Liddil <JLIDDIL at AZCC.Arizona.EDU>
Subject: AHA Talk Part 7


Blending


Let s look at how the lambic makers in Belgium make
traditional gueuze.  At the  Cantillon Brewery they blend
70%  old  lambic and 30%  young  lambic.   Old   lambic is
beer that has fermented at least two years and  young 
lambic is beer that  has fermented about 6 months.  The
bottled beer is then allowed to referment in the  bottle for
6-7 months or more until it is deemed ready.  After
refermentation the beer  has reached an attenuation of 90%
or more (15).


At the Boon Brewery things are done a little bit
differently.  Frank Boon has a slightly  different view of
the world and wants a more consistent product that has good 
keeping qualities and a good appearance.  To this end Boon
gueuze is made by  blending  old  beer that has fermented at
least two years with very young beer that  has only been
fermenting a few weeks.  They are blended at a ratio of 95:5 
respectively.  Boon also clarifies the old beer prior to
blending.  This gives a bottled  product that is reasonably
clear and does not develop ropiness.  The blending 
technique requires that you use your hydrometer to determine
the extract in the old  and young beer and then mix them
accordingly. (7,9).  Then you bottle the mixture  and hope
for the best.  This technique requires that you have more
than one batch of  lambic-style beer going at a time.


Using the fresh starter approach can still cause problems if
there is a large amount  of bacteria in the beer at
bottling.  They may consume the sugar before the yeast  and
thus little or no carbonation will develop.  To alleviate
this problem one can  remove the bacteria by filtering the
beer prior to bottling at the 0.2 micron level.   Then all
you need to do is add fresh yeast and sugar.  Alternatively
you can prime  with DME since it contains more than glucose,
the only sugar that the bacteria can  utilize.  The bacteria
will consume the glucose and then the Brettanomyces will 
consume the remaining sugars and dextrins and carbonation
will develop.  Or at  least that is how it should work in
theory.  


One can use the blending approach, but instead of using
young lambic you can use  a standard ale that has been very
lightly hopped, if at all.  You can measure the  gravity of
the standard ale and the lambic-style ale and then blend in
the right ratio  to give you enough extract to achieve
carbonation.  As with the other techniques you  can add a
fresh starter of Brettanomyces to aid in adequate
carbonation.  


Homebrewers have at their disposal another source of
dextrins to use for priming in  the form of maltodextrin
powder.  This powder contains little glucose and maltose 
and will eventually be hydrolyzed into fermentable sugars by
the Brettanomyces  cellular enzymes.  Standard priming rates
can be used for maltodextrin since it will  ultimately
become primarily fermentable sugars given enough time.  


One could use any combination of the above when bottling. 
There is a great deal of  experimentation left to be done in
this area of lambic-style ale brewing.  Keep in  mind that
lambic microorganisms grow slowly and it may take months or
even years  for the product to reach equilibrium.  Lambic,
unlike most other beers, continues to  change for the better
with age, quite often becoming more complex and less harsh.  
The key to lambic ale brewing is to be patient and go ahead
and start other lambic  ales and allow them to age.  In a
few years you may be rewarded with a very nice  complex
product and then again you might not.  The important thing
to keep in mind  is that as a lambic-style ale referments in
the bottle chemical reactions are occurring  that lead to
various flavor changes.  These reactions occur at a fairly
slow rate, since  many of them are catalyzed by enzymes from
Brettanomyces.  Remember  Brettanomyces grow slowly and
never reach very high concentrations in the  fermenting beer
or in the bottle.  This is one of the reasons why it takes
lambic ales  so long to ferment and for proper flavor
development to occur in the bottle.  Be  patient!


Brewers in Belgium have a distinct advantage when it comes
to bottling their beer  and achieving the right flavor.  A
typical lambic brewery has many casks with lambic  in them
from which the brewer can choose.  This allows the brewer to
achieve the  right flavor complexity and balance in his
product.  If a barrel contains lambic that is  too hard it
can be blended with softer lambic to achieve the right
flavor.  The typical  homebrewer does not have this option
available to him or her.  Usually a brewer has  one five
gallon batch going which is then bottled.  Depending on many
factors the  single batch may end up being too hard or too
soft in character.  As a brewer you  have a number of
options.  You can brew lambic-style beer on a regular basis
and  thus over time (years !) have enough lambic on hand to
allow you to blend.  The  other approach is to ferment a 5
or 10 gallon batch in one gallon bottles and hope  the
resulting beers all differ in character to some extent.


Quite often none of these approaches is practical for a
homebrewer.  But I will  remind you that making lambic-style
beers is not about being practical or making  beer in the
easiest manner.  One must make a decision based on what he
wants to  achieve when making this type of beer and how many
sacrifices one is willing to  make in order to achieve a
product that has any of the flavor and complexity of the 
real thing.  The choice is up to you.


Sanitation


Homebrewers and brewers in general are concerned with
sanitation and about  bringing wild yeast and bacteria into
their breweries whether by accident or  deliberately.  Such
concerns apply more to the professional rather than amateur 
brewer.  The homebrewer can easily take all his equipment
apart and thoroughly  clean and sanitize it.  The
professional does not have this luxury.  Carboys, buckets, 
hoses and other equipment can all be exposed to the
appropriate cleaners and  sanitizers to eliminate any wild
yeast and bacteria.  This writer brews all his beers  using
HDPE and PC containers and has used the same containers to
brew lambic- style as well as other beers for the last 3 or
so years.  Cross contamination has not  been a problem at
all. It is important to clean and sanitize all equipment
thoroughly  before and after each use.  Make sure all
equipment is free from any dirt and grime  and use an
appropriate sanitizer.  After a container has had beer in it
for a year it is  important to clean it well.  Automatic
dishwashing detergent works well for this task  since it
contains TSP as well as sodium hypochlorite.  Thus it does a
preliminary job  of sanitizing the container.  You can then
soak the container overnight  in your  favorite sanitizer
and then rinse it out the next day.  By following good
cleaning and  sanitation practices you should not have to
worry about cross contamination.  If you  are concerned
about contamination you may want to have a dedicated set of 
equipment for lambic-style beer brewing.  For a more
thorough discussion of  cleaning and sanitation you may want
to consult some additional references (18,19).


Enteric Bacteria Characteristics and Growth (new section)


During the first month of the spontaneous fermentation of
lambic beer the dominate  bacteria consists of
enterobacteria.  These bacteria grow very rapidly and effect
the  growth of subsequent yeast and bacteria.  They also
effect the flavor of the beer via  the various metabolic
byproducts they produce.  


The enterobacteria that have been found to be present in
lambic beer include  Enterobacter cloacea, Klebsiella
pneumoniae, Escherichia coli, Hafnia alvei,  Enterobacter
aerogenes and Citrobacter freundii.  These are gram-negative
straight  rods which are motile with the exception of
Klebsiella.  There can also be non-motile  variants of the
other species.  They all are able to ferment glucose with
some  producing gas while others do not.  Most of them grow
quite well in the presence of  air and are also able to
ferment lactose.  These bacteria follow either a butanediol 
fermentation pathway or a mixed acid pathway.  This leads to
large amounts of lactic  (~1500 ppm), acetic (~600 ppm) and
succinic (~275 ppm) acids along with 2,3  butanediol (~2000
ppm) being formed in the first month of the fermentation
(10, 23).   They can reach levels of 1 X 108 cells /ml
during the first 30-40 days of the  fermentation.  After
this period the decrease in pH and the increase in alcohol 
caused by yeasts of the Saccharomyces species causes them to
die off.  


The various by products from the growth of the
enterobacteria can lead to various  flavors described as
celery-like, parsnip-like, mushroom-like, smoky or mouldy
(10).   These flavors are not removed by the fermentation
process.  The various acid  products described previously
also have an impact on the beer flavor contributing to  the
acidic taste of the final product.  In fact the majority of
acetic acid found in  lambic beer originates in the first
month and is the byproduct of enterobacterial  growth.  


Typically enteric bacteria are considered pathogenic
(disease-causing) in humans.   They are often considered the
cause of various forms of food poisoning.  This is  indeed
the case, with Salmonella being cause of the vast majority
of cases (24).   The enteric bacteria found in lambic are
generally not considered pathogenic in  people other than
those who have immune systems that have been compromised in 
some way (i.e AIDS or immunosuppresive chemotherapy).  


Research has shown that the kitchens of many peoples homes
harbor more enteric  bacteria than their bathrooms. (24) 
These bacteria include all those found in lambic  along with
Salmonella.  Meats, vegetables and kitchen sponges or wash
cloths have  all been found to be highly contaminated, with
the later having particularly high  bacterial counts.  This
makes the kitchen an ideal environment for allowing the 
introduction of enteric bacteria into ones wort.


Discussions among homebrewers about making lambic-style
beers have also  avoided the subject of enteric bacteria. 
This has been due to the fear of food  poisoning and the
associated side effects.  Again research would indicate that 
anyone who brews in their kitchen does indeed end up with
some amount of enteric  bacteria in there beer.  The growth
of the brewing yeast and the subsequent  reduction in pH and
increase in alcohol kill the bacteria off before they can
cause off  flavors or other problems in the majority of
cases.  


It can be argued that without enteric bacterial growth and
the subsequent depletion  of glucose and production of
metabolic byproducts lambic would probably not have  the
depth of flavor and complexity that it does.  Because
homebrewers have been   afraid  of enteric bacteria they are
missing an integral part of the production  process. 
Studies indicate that the enteric bacteria have a profound
effect on the  subsequent growth and flavor development in
real lambic.  In order to achieve the  same flavor profile
it would seem important to have this initial growth of these 
bacteria.  


In order to allow the wort to become infected with enteric
bacteria a reasonable  approach would be to leave the
fermenter open near a kitchen sink for an hour or  two after
the wort has cooled.  Then the brewer should wait an
additional 24 hours  before adding any yeast.  This will
allow the enteric bacteria to gain a foothold and  begin to
grow and multiply to a level that allows them to produce a
significant  amount of metabolic byproducts and deplete the
glucose.  After 24 hours the  addition of a small amount of
yeast will ultimately lead to the enteric bacteria being 
killed off.  Again because the yeast will produce alcohol
and lower the pH of the wort  to a level at which the
bacteria can no longer survive.




------------------------------


Date: Tue, 11 Jun 1996 7:50:38 -0700 (MST)
From: Jim Liddil <JLIDDIL at AZCC.Arizona.EDU>
Subject: AHA Talk Part 8


Brettanomyces Characteristics and Growth 


Brettanomyces is considered one of the major yeasts
responsible for the flavor  characteristics of lambic. 
Typically the species most homebrewers use are either 
Brettanomyces bruxellensis or lambicus.  These yeast have
cell shapes that are  usually ellipsoidal and can also be
cylindrical or elongated.  They frequently form  chains as
they grow also.  These cells  quite often form
pseudomycelium and grow  as filamentous branched cells. (25,
26)  This gives the cells the ability to float and  form a
pellicle on the beer.  


Brettanomyces have the ability to form acetic acid from
glucose under aerobic  conditions.  Thus when they grow on
calcium carbonate agar there is a visible zone  of clearing
around the colonies.  They demonstrate a negative Pasteur
effect.  That  is they demonstrate a higher production of
alcohol under aerobic conditions as  opposed Saccharomyces
which show decreased alcohol production under aerobic 
conditions (27).  Brettanomyces also have cellular
dextrinases that allow them to  utilize dextrose polymers
larger than the typical trisaccharides that can be utilized
by  Saccharomyces.  A culture of Brettanomyces has a
characteristic acetic, earthy,  horsey aroma.  These yeast
grow much more slowly than do Saccharomyces  brewing
strains.  Also they are resistant to cycloheximide unlike
most normal  brewing yeasts.  Brewers classify Brettanomyces
as  wild  yeast and typically do all  they can to avoid
them.  In normal brewing these yeasts will lead to various
off  flavors described as phenolic, smoky and goaty.  In
lambic beer these are desired  characteristics.


Another aspect of Brettanomyces is their ability to
enzymatically catalyze the  formation of esters from the
corresponding alcohol and acid.  Thus ethyl alcohol and 
acetic acid can be combined to from ethyl acetate and lactic
acid and ethanol can be  combined to form ethyl lactate. 
These are two of the primary esters found in lambic  beer
(28, 29).


Pediococcus Characteristics and Growth


Of the lactic acid bacteria found after about three months
of fermentation,  Pediococcus damnosus is the dominant one
in traditional lambic brewing.  It is a  spherical,
tetrad-forming, gram positive bacteria.  Pediococcus is
described as a  homofermentative bacteria because it
ferments glucose to lactic acid without the  production of
carbon dioxide.  As the Pediococcus grows the concentration
of lactic  acid increases and can reach levels of 5000 PPM
or more in the lambic.  This  increase in acid is a slow and
progressive occurrence over a number of months.  
Pediococcus is a very fastidious organism, meaning it grows
slowly and has complex  nutritional requirements.  Because
of this fact and the environmental conditions, the 
concentration of cells is never very high, being only 1 X
106 cells/ml or less.  Of  course this is in reference to
spontaneously fermented lambic; cells numbers may be  higher
in an artificially inoculated wort.  The lactic acid as well
as diacetyl and  acetoin that the Pediococcus produce
contributes to the complex flavor and aroma  of lambic, with
the acid making the largest contribution.  The levels of
vicinal  diketones (diacetyl and acetoin) have been found to
be at or below taste threshold  levels.(13)


Culturing and Maintaining Lambic Organisms


To brew lambic-style beer it is advantageous to know the
basics of yeast culturing.  It  is a further help to know
how to culture the various organisms specifically involved
in  lambic fermentation.  For the purposes of this article
the discussion will focus on the  culturing of what are
considered by many to be the primary players in the 
fermentation process.  Besides Saccharomyces these include
species of  Brettanomyces yeast and Pediococcus damnosus
bacteria.  


Any type of Saccharomyces can be used for the primary
fermentation of a lambic- style beer, since it will
contribute little if anything to the overall flavor profile
of the  finished product.  One can find any number of
articles and books on how to culture  these yeast and
maintain them in the home brewery. (25, 26, 30, 31, 32)


It is the other organisms involved which are more difficult
to culture and maintain  without some experience and
knowledge of how they grow.  The yeast of the  Brettanomyces
species bruxellensis and lambicus and the bacteria
Pediococcus  damnosus are microorganisms that require very
specialized nutrients and  environmental conditions.  It
should be noted that unless you are going to brew 
lambic-style beers more than once or twice a year you may be
better off buying new  cultures each time rather than trying
to maintain them in a home environment.  If  you do feel the
need to maintain the cultures at home then you should become
very  familiar with the culturing of normal brewing yeast
first.  


Both Brettanomyces and Pediococcus produce acids as  normal
metabolic by- products and because of this they need to be
maintained on media which can help  neutralize it. 
Otherwise, the acid will lead to a large drop in pH and the
organisms  will die.  The most readily available food grade
acid neutralizing agent is calcium  carbonate (CaCO3), also
called precipitated chalk.  A concentration of 2% (2 g/100 
ml) in the growth media or agar will provide adequate
buffering capacity.  Calcium  carbonate is essentially
insoluble though and this can present problems if it is used
in  making wort agar.  To prevent the CaCO3 from falling out
of solution before the agar  solidifies, cool the wort-agar
solution to 113-122 F (45-50 C), with constant swirling, 
prior to pouring it into the tubes or dishes.  When CaCO3 is
used in liquid media one  can gently swirl the media with
the culture growing in it once or twice a day to help 
prevent any stratification of the acid in the solution and
aid the neutralization of it  with the CaCO3.  As the lambic
organisms grow in the liquid media the acid  produced will
react with the CaCO3 causing it to be solubilized over time. 
Even  when a culture reaches maximum confluence there may
still be some CaCO3  unneutralized, but this is not anything
to worry about as the acid produced by the  growth in the
main wort will dissolve it in time.


Brettanomyces Culturing


The Brettanomyces yeast can be grown on wort agar which
incorporates 2% CaCO3  as noted previously.  The wort itself
should be of a gravity of approximately 1.040  and
preferably made from an all grain wort due to the possible
lack of nutrients in  malt extract (5,6).  Due to the
fastidious nature and acid production by  Brettanomyces they
need to be transferred to new slant more often than do 
Saccharomyces.  It is recommended they be transferred to new
slants at least every  2 months.  Longer intervals between
transfers may lead to cultures which are no  longer viable.


Because of this frequent manipulation there is a greater
chance the yeasts  themselves may become contaminated with
other yeast, mold or bacteria.  Thus  your sterile culture
technique needs to be very good and you need to pay
attention to  details.  If your culture does become
contaminated you can prepare a dilute  suspension of the
yeast and streak it out on a petri dish which has wort agar
with 2%  CaCO3 and also incorporates 10 ug/ml cycloheximide.
(Appropriate cautions  inserted)  As the colonies grow watch
for a zone of clearing around the individual  colonies. 
Agar prepared with calcium carbonate will be opaque and
white in color  and as the Brettanomyces grow the acid they
produce will dissolve the calcium  carbonate and create the
zone of clearing.  Generally only non-Saccharomyces  yeast
will grow on media with cycloheximide in it and those that
do grow and have  zones of clearing around them are likely
to be Brettanomyces.  You can then pick  the colonies off
and re-culture them on cycloheximide-free media.  This is by
no  means a definite technique for the isolation and
characterization of Brettanomyces.   Yeast such as Kloeckera
are also acid producers that will grow on cycloheximide 
agar.  If you have doubts at all then you may be better off
buying new cultures  and/or locating a microbiologist who
will work for homebrew.  The only absolute way  to
characterize a culture is through extensive fermentation,
assimilation and  morphological testing, don t believe it if
someone tells you otherwise.


Pediococcus Culturing


Pediococcus is more difficult to grow and maintain than is
Brettanomyces due to its  more complex nutritional and
environmental requirements.  Pediococcus grows best  in
liquid rather than solid media and this increases the
chances for unseen  contamination.  Unless you have access
to a 1000X power microscope and have  culturing experience,
it is recommended that you do not try to maintain this
bacteria  at home for any length of time.  MRS (deMan,
Rogosa and Sharpe) broth is the  preferred media for growing
and maintaining Pediococcus over long periods.  It is a 
defined media that is rather expensive but provides the
necessary nutrients and  buffers for optimal growth over
extended periods.  Prepare the media as indicated  on the
package.  Sometimes bacteria can lose their hop resistance
if grown in  unhopped media for extended periods.  Thus if
you are going to try to keep cultures  going over a period
of time it is suggested you add iso-alpha acids to the media 
using some type of hop extract.  Use of whole or pellet hops
leads to particulate  matter which causes the media to
become cloudy and less than ideal for visual  monitoring of
growth.  A suggested level is in the 15-25 IBU range.  A
minimum  suggested passage interval is every month.  Allow
the culture to grow for a week at  room temperature and then
it can be stored at 4 C.  Another method for storing 
Pediococcus is the use of stab cultures. MRS media is
prepared using 1.5 % agar  and put into tubes.  The tubes of
solidified media are inoculated by using a needle or 
inoculation loop to stab the bacteria into it.  The
bacterium is allowed to grow at  room temperature for a week
or so until signs of growth can be seen.  Then the  tubes
can be stored at 4 C.  Whether you use liquid or stab
cultures you need to  keep the tube caps screwed down tight
to limit air diffusion into the cultures and  prevent
desiccation.  There is no need to worry about pressure
buildup since  Pediococccus are not gas producers.  The same
caveats apply to bacteria culturing  as for lambic yeasts:
you need the proper equipment and good technique. 


If you are going to get serious about culturing
microorganisms used for lambic-style  beers then you might
consider buying or building a laminar flow hood of some
type.   This will allow you to work in a nearly sterile
environment.  Fungi Perfecti is one of  several companies
that sell them or you can build your own. (33)


Starters


Whether you choose to culture your own lambic microorganisms
or buy them, you  will need to propagate them prior to
adding them to the wort.  A wort of specific  gravity 1.040
with 2% CaCO3  will work just fine for this purpose.  You
may also want  to add some hops, to achieve a range of 15-25
IBU.  You should follow a scale up  procedure for these
microorganisms so as to reduce the risk of other organisms
over  growing the cultures.  With lambic cultures one does
not have to make as large a  starter as that used for normal
beer.  Start with a volume of 1/4 ounce (~5 ml) and  allow
the culture to reach confluence.  When it has, add the
contents to a volume of  4 ounces (~100 ml) and allow it to
again reach confluence.  At this point you can  pitch or
scale up one more time to a volume of 1 pint (~450 ml). 
Such procedures  have also been outlined elsewhere (30, 31,
32).  Be aware that Brettanomyces is a  very slow grower as
compared to other yeast and generally does not develop a
large  kraeusen head either.  The starter should develop a
typical Brettanomyces aroma  due to the various fermentation
byproducts.  You should notice a distinctive acid  aroma
along with aromas often described as horsey or mousey.  The
starter will also  develop an acidic, mousey, earthy taste
if the yeast is indeed Brettanomyces. As the  yeast grows
the acid produced will cause the CaCO3 to dissolve and the
fine white  precipitate from it will mostly disappear.


Due to the additional vitamin requirements of Pediococcus
you may want to add  10% apple or tomato juice to the wort
starter.  Another alternative is to use 0.5%  dried brewers
yeast.  Yeast extract is even better due to its purity and
solubility, but  it is expensive.  Wort from a previous
brewing session with 0.5% yeast extract added  works very
well.  This gives a nice clear media in which one can
monitor the growth  of the bacteria more easily.  As the
bacterium reaches confluence a clear zone will  develop at
the top of the liquid and the rest of the liquid will be
very cloudy due to  the large amount of bacteria.  


For other beers you want to pitch a large volume of yeast to
ensure a rapid  fermentation and decrease the risk of
contamination by wild yeast and bacteria.   Well,
lambic-style beers require you to throw caution to the wind. 
Large starters of  normal ale yeast, Brettanomyces and
Pediococcus are not required.  If the yeast and  bacteria
are healthy there is no reason they should not grow in the
wort using the  small volumes as described previously. 
Remember this beer will be in a vessel for a  year or more
and the bacteria and yeast have plenty of time to grow. 
Also as the  acid producing strains grow they will kill off
any other organisms due to the lower  than normal pH,
increase in alcohol and reduction in sugars that are
fermentable by  other organisms.  If you feel the need to
use larger starters to put yourself at ease  then by all
means go ahead.  Just remember the beer will still take a
year or so to  develop the proper character.




------------------------------






End of Lambic Digest
************************
-------