Subject: Some thoughts
Date: Wed, 30 Sep 92 15:05:16 cdt
From: "Butts,Stephen J" <BUTTS@AC.GRIN.EDU>


Gentlemen (and ladies, although I've not seen any communications therefrom):


I realize that it's a free country and good ol' American inventiveness should 
not be discouraged and that every now and then something truly wonderful may 
come from just throwing very disparate stuff into a pot and waiting to see 
what happens.  Nevertheless, recent submissions (and earlier ones, prior to 
the "scrumpie" exchange) impell me to offer a few Thoughts:


1.  Cider is not beer.
2.  Cider is not beer.
3.  Cider is NOT beer.  Cider is WINE.  It's apple wine.  You don't boil 
    grape juice to make wine, and you don't boil apple juice to make cider.
    Also, you don't add beer stuff like malt:  if you do, you get (if you're
    lucky) a weak beer with musty apple overtones.  


    [Now don't y'all get me wrong:  a good, malty, chewy homebrew is ter-
    rific, and I've enjoyed more than my share; it's just that my carboys
    a full of slowly perking cider all winter long.]


4.  Which brings me to the next point:  don't expect to make cider quickly.
    Primary fermentation may take as long as 12-14 weeks or even longer,
    and that doesn't include settling time.


5.  Sugar:  Can't complain here; addition of sugar is traditional.  But
    that doesn't mean it's required.  I've found that while (of course)
    additional sugar raises the alcohol content, it harshens the taste of
    the cider and tends to kill the subtle apple-y nose of the product.
    Your choice.  For me, however, the whole point of doing cider is to
    get something that says "apple" to me at the end.


Well, THAT'S off my chest.  A good apple-crushing season to all.


- -- Steve Butts  (BUTTS@GRIN1.BitNet)


------------------------------


Date: Mon, 28 Sep 92 12:27 CDT
From: arf@ddsw1.mcs.com (Jack Schmidling)
Subject: Cider


 
 To: Cider Digest
 Fm: Jack Schmidling
 
 As my entire cider experience spans only four batches, two 
 of which are still fermenting, I will exhaust my entire data 
 base in one posting.....
 
 All apples are off my two trees.  One is a red delicious and 
 the other is something like a McIntosh.  They are mixed 
 equaly by weight before crushing.  Gravity of blend is 
 around 1.040 and I get about .6 gal from 10 lbs of apples.
 
 BATCH #1 was an experiment to determine the effects of 
 Pasteurizing apple juice.
 
 I heated a gallon of fresh crushed juice to 180F and held 
 for 30 minutes.  I  then refrigerated it overnight and 
 compared it to a gallon that went directly into the frige 
 after crushing.
 
 Both my wife and I preferred the Pasteurized juice and could 
 see no reason not to do it on future batches.
 
 BATCH #2 was to determine the effect of diluting fresh juice 
 with water.  My crusher/press is rather tedious to use and 
 being kinda lazy.....
 
 Mixed 1/2 gal juice with 1/2 gal water and two cups of sugar 
 for gravity of 1.036.  Heated to 180F and cooled.  The taste 
 was not substantially different from the pure juice.   I 
 then pitched with pure cultured Whitbread yeast.  It 
 fermented lethargically for several weeks and I filled a few 
 plastic bottles but they never properly carbonated.  We 
 ended up drinking it all before it fermented out but I don't 
 think it ever would have in any reasonable time.  The 
 gravity was still almost 1.03 after three weeks.  My guess 
 is that the yeast was not appropriate.
 
 BATCH #3 was actually a Fall wine that I had been planning 
 since apple blossom time.  We harvested mulberries and 
 elderberries as they ripened and froze them.  The grapes 
 ripened about the same time as the apples and that is when 
 we made the wine.
 
 The fruit, about 10 lbs total, along with 2 gallons of apple 
 juice, and 5 lbs sugar, was heated to 180F and allowed to 
 cool to about 150F.  To this was added another 3 gallons of 
 juice that had been previously pasteurized and refrigerated 
 to speed up the cooling.
 
 The flavor of this mixture was very pleasant and the 
 Mullberries seemed to predominate at this point.  The 
 gravity was 1.074 and I pitched pure cultured  Red Star 
 Champagne yeast.
 
 The beauty of having a spigot on the fermenter is that one 
 can taste it on a regular basis and it just kept getting 
 better.  I racked it after a week (1.020) and a week later 
 it was 1.005 and tasted like a first class Beaujolais.  It 
 is now totally dry and I am not sure just what I will do 
 next.  I am leaning toward finishing it as is and aging on 
 oak chips.  The alternative is to keep adding sugar till it 
 dies and retains a bit of sweetness but that gets the 
 alcohol up above where I like it.
 
 BATCH #4 was a five gallon version of #2 but pitched with 
 pure cultured Edme yeast.  It fermented vigorously and is 
 now in secondary.  I plan to keg and force carbonate it when 
 fermentation stops and it clears a bit.
 
 That's my total experience with cider.
 
 js
 
 
 


------------------------------