Subject: Re:  Cider Digest #181 Thu Oct  1 11:00:02 EDT 1992
Date: Thu, 1 Oct 92 11:39:36 EDT
From: (Don't Call Me Dude!) <stevens@stsci.edu>


In Cider Digest #181, Tom McCullough asked about using cane
sugar in cider.


Homebrewers don't use cane sugar because it tends to give a
cidery flavor to their beers. Somehow I don't think this is
a big concern for cider makers :-)  


If you've been happy with your results using cane sugar, then
why switch now? Cane sugar is usually cheaper than corn sugar
and more readily available.


Cheers!
- ---Mark Stevens
   stevens@stsci.edu


------------------------------


Date: Thu, 1 Oct 92 11:55 CDT
From: arf@ddsw1.mcs.com (Jack Schmidling)
Subject: APPLE PRESS


 
 To: Cider Digest
 Fm: Jack Schmidling
 
 Although a picture is worth a thousand words, I will try to 
 describe the press I made without a picture and less than a 
 thousand words.
 
 It is a tall wooden box approximately two feet high and one 
 foot square.  It is made from four pieces of 3/4 pine nailed 
 together at alternate edges.  The bottom is another piece of 
 3/4 pine screwed to the bottom of the box.  It and the 
 bottom quarter of the box have numerous 1/4" holes drilled 
 randomly.
 
 Apples are dropped into the box and smashed with a ram that 
 is nothing more than a two inch square piece of wood about 2 
 1/2 feet long.  I tried all sorts of other things like food 
 processors, and meat grinders but this works incredibly well 
 and efficiently.  One bash per apple takes care of the 
 crushing part.  The crusher sits in a plastic dish pan and 
 the juice starts running after a few apples are crushed.  I 
 can usually do about ten lbs before it gets too sloshy to 
 continue.  At this point, I pour the juice in the pan into a 
 jug and go into the pressing mode.
 
 The heart of the press is about two feet of 5/8" threaded 
 rod from the hardware store.  This rod threads into a nut 
 that is on the bottom of a board that straddles the top of 
 the box.  There are retainers on the bottom of the board to 
 keep the nut from turning and on top of the box to hold the 
 board down.  The ones on top swing in and out for removal of 
 the press.  The bottom of the rod presses into a board that 
 just fits the inside of the box and presses down on the mush 
 when the screw is tightened.  The top end of the rod has two 
 nuts that act as a lock nut and provide purchase for a box 
 or crescent wrench.
 
 I left out a lot of details but there should be enough to 
 get anyone going who is really interested.
 
 As mentioned before, I get about 3 quarts of juice from ten 
 lbs of apples.  This equates to about 3 gals per bushel.
 
 js
 
 


------------------------------