Subject: sorbate in cider..
Date: Wed, 18 Nov 1992 08:38:43 -0500 (EST)
From: Paul Andrews <PANDREWS@HPB.HWC.CA>


hi,
I received about 10l of store bought cider from a friend as a gift.  I'd
like to have a crak at fermenting it (I'm more into homebrew than cider)
but......even though it says "not perserved"..on the fine print on the
label it also says "contains not less than 0.02% sorbate".  Do I
have any hope of getting some champagne yeast to get going in this?
Paul andrews
HEalth and Welfare Canada, Ottawa, Ontario


------------------------------


Date: Tue, 17 Nov 1992 12:44 EST
From: "JOSEPH V. GERMANI" <GERMANI%NSLVAX@Venus.YCC.Yale.Edu>
Subject: flocculation


Greetings,
        I must admit that I feel a bit guilty for not writing in for so long,
even though I have some experience to relate.  Unfortunately, my experience
has not been all good.  Last year's batch (5gal fresh cider, few lbs malt
extract, Edme ale yeast) didn't come out too well.  It was dryer than I had
hoped, but it also was very sour and had a sort of chemical after taste (kind
of like something petrolium based).  I half expected it to be too dry, and I
figure that the sourness must have something to do with the type of apples used
(I have no idea what they were).  But the after taste is very disappointing. 
Has anyone else gotten this?  By the way it's a year old now and the taste is
still there, although a bit diminished.
        I should point out that the previous year's batch (two years ago) was
wonderful, although very dry.  It was very much like a wine.  I don't remember
the recipe, but it was 5 gal. of fresh cider, a bunch of honey, and Epernay
yeast.
        On to the question I originally wanted to ask.  Flocculation.  How do I
force it?  I have a gallon of cider (+ 3/4 lb corn sugar, Edme Ale yeast) that
has been fermenting for two weeks.  The gravity is now about 1.010 and that's
where I would like it to stay, even though I know that the yeast will probably 
happily munch away until it's down below 1.  I don't happen to have any campden
or other yeast killers around.  I just put it in the fridge and was hoping that
I could force the yeast to go dormant.  Anyone got any idea if this will work? 
I've had it chilled for a couple days now, and it seems to have stopped
fermenting, but it is still cloudy and yeasty tasting.  Will the yeast
flocculate and stop ruining the flavor, or will I have to resort to chemical
warfare?


                             Yours in fermentation,
                                    Joe
                                    (GERMANI%NSLVAX@VENUS.YCC.YALE.EDU)


------------------------------


Date: 18 Nov 1992 08:32:35 -0600 (MDT)
From: MARK TARATOOT <SLNDW@CC.USU.EDU>
Subject: friendly comments wanted


Greetings.


I have started my first batch of cider and would like some comments.
So far I have used basic steps.
First I put 5 gallons of fresh pressed local cider in a sanitized
glass carboy.  I added metabisulfate and waited a day.  I added
Williams dry Ale yeast (mail order from california) and some yeast
nutrient.  A week later things were finaly beginning to come out
of lag, and I added Red Star Epernay II to the must.   Now it has
a nice layer of yeasty froth on top.  I am planning on racking
to a secondary in a couple of weeks.  Here is where I need comments:


I am considering adding honey and perhaps acid blend when I rack to
make a cyser.  Is this a bad idea??  Since I am now using wine yeast,
I thought it might be wise to boost the sugar a bit so they can
go off the way they like to.  On the other hand, since this will 
be my first cider and the orchard will be pressing all winter and
into spring so I can make MORE, I thought I should just let this 
one go with only cider.  Of course, I already sulfited and pitched,
so I have already altered it a bit.


Comments would be appreciated!


 -toot
SLNDW@cc.usu.edu   


------------------------------


Date: Wed, 18 Nov 92 22:40 GMT
From: "Stephen G. Pimentel" <0004876702@mcimail.com>
Subject: cider press query


I take it from the strand on pine flavors from a homemade press that
plans for a press were once given on this digest. Does anyone have
a press design they'd like to share?


------------------------------