HOMEBREW Digest    Fri 18 November 1988


        FORUM ON BEER, HOMEBREWING, AND RELATED ISSUES
                Rob Gardner, Digest Coordinator


Contents:
  ginger beer (Jay Hersh)
  recipes, liquid yeast


Send submissions to homebrew%hpfcmr`at`hplabs.hp.com
Send requests to homebrew-request%hpfcmr`at`hplabs.hp.com


----------------------------------------------------------------------


Date: Fri, 18 Nov 88 11:01:18 est
From: jhersh`at`yy.cicg.rpi.edu (Jay Hersh)
Subject: ginger beer


hi,
 here is a recipe given to me by one of our homebrew club members


  1 true brew continental light kit (from Crosby & Baker)
  1 3.3 lb can M&F Hopped Light syrup
  1 cup corn sugar
  3 0z. fresh grated ginger root
  2 pkg edme ale yeast
  
it is a light beer with a fairly strong ginger character. Hope you enjoy.


- jay h


------------------------------


Date: Fri, 18 Nov 88 7:29:30 CST
From: hpfcla!hplabs!amdahl!uunet!ingr!tesla!steve
Full-Name: 
Subject: recipes, liquid yeast


 Regarding favorite recipes - I will post a brown ale recipe next week, but my
vote for all time best kit brew is William's Weisbeer or Weizenbeer (I forget
which they call it). Several members of our club have brewed it, and I have
brewed three batches. It is amazingly consistent, and is an excellent light
summer brew. It is the only kit I have seen that I would recommend following
the directions exactly. The kit consists of a plastic heat-sealed bag of
extract syrup (60% wheat, 40% barley), seperately bagged bittering and
finishing hops (hallertaur), a package of liquid yeast, and a pre-measured
package of priming corn sugar. The kit sells for about $22, and has to be good
for me to buy more at that price. Actually, my wife likes this beer so much
(and doesn't have the allergic reaction to it that she does to most beer),
that she bought me another keg on the condition that we keep a supply of this
beer around. Note that I have no connection with William's except as a
customer, and in fact think that they are overpriced on most items, and either
they are slow to ship orders, or (more likely) it takes forever for UPS to
get packages from San Leandro, Ca to Huntsville, Al. I suppose that I should
provide a phone number, but I don't have it here. I would like to hear
comments on their other products.
 I would like to hear about other brewers' experiences with consistency of
recipes. For example, several members of our club have brewed "Rocky Racoon's
Crystal Honey Lager" from TCJoHB, and there has been a wide variety of (all
drinkable) results. I suspect that between the honey used, technique, and
the yeast used, there is room for a lot of variation. Comments?
 Re: liquid yeast cultures - I have been using them exclusively for about
6 months, and am very happy with the results. In an effort to reduce the cost,
I bought a "yeast bank" from William's (another overpriced item) which allows
you to freeze yeast cultures in a special solution. I make a 1 pint starter 
from the bloated liquid starter, and freeze several cultures from it, pitching
the rest. I have successfully re-started a frozen lager culture, and used it
to brew a pilsner. The big problem is planning ahead to have an active
starter. Two weeks ago Saturday, I got a really bad case of the hots to brew
something (the converted will understand), and wanted to make a bock but didn't
have a starter to pitch, and had no dried yeast on hand and well, my pilsner
had been in primary for a week, so I racked it and pitched 8 oz of the slurry
from the primary into the bock. Within four hours there was three inches of
foam on the beer, and an hour after that, it was blowing off like mad. I
bottled the bock last weekend, so I'll know in a few weeks what it tastes
like, but it tasted fine going into the bottles, and the fermentation smelled
fine.
 I suppose I better stop rambling. See you all in Fort Mitchell, Ky next year.


                Steve Conklin                uunet!ingr!tesla!steve
                Intergraph Corp.        ingr!tesla!steve`at`uunet.uu.net
                Huntsville, AL 35807
                (205) 772-4013


Relax! Don't worry. Have a homebrew.


------------------------------


End of HOMEBREW Digest
************************
-------