Subject: Mead Lover's Digest #1351, 19 November 2007
From: mead-request@talisman.com


Mead Lover's Digest #1351                                  19 November 2007

            Forum for Discussion of Mead Making and Consuming
                      Dick Dunn, Digest Janitor

Contents:
  articles for the digest MUST be related to mead! (Mead Lovers Digest Admin)
  Olive oil addition ("silence bob")
  Apple Juice Mead (Marc Shapiro)
  2008 IMF Home Mead Maker Competition - Call for Entries (petar.bakulic@dsl...)

NOTE: Digest appears when there is enough material to send one.
Send ONLY articles for the digest to mead@talisman.com.
Use mead-request@talisman.com for [un]subscribe/admin requests.
Digest archives and FAQ are available at www.talisman.com/mead
A searchable archive is at http://www.gotmead.com/mldarchives.html
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: articles for the digest MUST be related to mead!
From: mead-request@talisman.com (Mead Lovers Digest Admin)
Date: Mon, 19 Nov 2007 00:10:19 -0700 (MST)

Gentle readers:

Articles submitted to the Mead-Lover's Digest must be about mead, or related
to mead in some plausible way.

Prior to sending each digest, I do a quick relevance check.  If nothing
else, it's a final barrier against spam in the digest, and I hope you all
appreciate that.

I am generous and forgiving in interpreting "related to mead"; I don't
want anybody worrying that an article might be on the edge of relevance.
For example, notes about Colony Collapse Disorder are reasonable even
though this is not a beekeeper's mailing list.  We need good supplies of
good honey to make mead; any event that severely affects honey quality or
availability is a major concern.  If I think an article is on the hairy
edge of relevance, I will NOT cancel it; rather I will contact you.  I'm
really trying to avoid any role which looks like moderator or editor.

HOWEVER, I am utterly unforgiving about postings which obviously have no
relation to mead and are merely attempting to abuse the list as a bully-
pulpit or convenient target for other purposes.  Second chances after such
postings are rare, so don't try to be coy and see what happens.  Don't even
"think" about sending postings for noble causes, random charities, virus
warnings, politics, etc.  It better have some connection to mead, or the
posting is gone -and- you're outta here.

And yes, there is a "proximate cause" for this note:  Someone (a now-ex-
subscriber:-) tried to use the list to send campaign info for a US
Presidential candidate.

- --the currently-severely-scowling janitor

------------------------------

Subject: Olive oil addition
From: "silence bob" <asilentbob@gmail.com>
Date: Wed, 14 Nov 2007 04:56:28 -0600

Personally I think i would try to use a micropipettor to accurately
measure out a very small volume of oil, perhaps .01ml = 10 microliter,
then dilute the oil with something its likely to dissolve in like very
dry pure ethanol. As long as you know the oils density you can find
how many grams you have per unit of ethanol. The oil would still
likely drop out of solution when added to the must, but it would be a
convenient way to measure it. Also the relatively small amount of
ethanol shouldn't effect the yeast too much. Since most of us don't
have micropipettors on hand... One could go up to the nearest college
campus and find a biology teacher who would probably allow you to
prepare the solution there after you explain your situation. The
micropipettors use sterile disposable tips and your pipetting into
strong ethanol, so the risk of contamination should be extremely low.
Generally the standard micropipettor ranges are 200-1000ul 20-200ul
and 1-20ul if i remember correctly.

New to the list. I have only done a couple 1 gallon batches of
blueberry melomel and sweet mead.

------------------------------

Subject: Apple Juice Mead
From: Marc Shapiro <mshapiro_42@yahoo.com>
Date: Wed, 14 Nov 2007 08:30:56 -0800

"Sam Johnson" <sjohnson@graytrout.com> wrote:
> Date: Wed, 7 Nov 2007 07:35:59 -0500
>
> Does anyone have an easy apple juice based mead recipe?
>
You can't get much easier than this:

4  gallons apple juice
12 lbs honey
Optional:
1 Cup Lemon Juice
Cloves (4 or 5 per gallon)
Cinnamon (1 or two sticks per gallon)
Ginger (1 thin slice per gallon)

NOTE: Use WHOLE spices, NOT powdered!  If you like other spices, mix,
match, or change at will.  The spices listed are MY favorites.  I know
people who have made excellent mead with nutmeg, or allspice.  The
choice is yours.

I like using the spices and lemon juice since I can then not bother with
nutrients, energizers, acids, etc.

Heat 1 gallon of juice in a 10 qt (or larger) pot to just under a boil
and remove from the heat.  Add the spices in a cheesecloth, or muslin
bag.  Cover the pot and allow it to sit for several hours (overnight
works well).  Remove the spice bag and reheat to just below boiling.
Remove from the heat and gradually add the honey, stirring to dissolve
it all.

Pour 1 gallon of apple juice into your fermenter.  Add the apple juice
and honey mixture.  Mix well.  Add the rest of the apple juice and the
lemon juice.  Mix, stir, or shake until all is thoroughly mixed.

Make a starter and ferment as you would for any mead.

You can call this a spiced cyser, or an apple metheglyn.

- --
Marc Shapiro
mshapiro_42@yahoo.com

------------------------------

Subject: 2008 IMF Home Mead Maker Competition - Call for Entries
From: petar.bakulic@dslextreme.com
Date: Fri, 16 Nov 2007 16:32:46 -0800 (PST)

2008 IMF Home Mead Maker Competition

Last year the Home Mead Maker Competition had 242 entries which makes it
the largest mead competition we know of. Bottle up your best and compete
against some of the great Home Mead Makers in the country.

How do I enter?
Go to http://hmmc.meadfest.com/hmmc_entry.htm to enter online or you may
download the entry form, bottle ID forms, rules, regulations and style
guidelines. We will be adding a PayPal option to the Web Entry form.

Why should I enter?
* You will be competing against some of the finest Mead makers in the world
* You will get great feedback from judges about the quality of your mead
* You will get suggestions from judges on how to improve your mead

When may I enter?
Entries are open now and the entry deadline is December 15th, 2007. 1st
Round Judging ? January 19, 2008

Medal Announcements and Awards:
Final round judging will be on February 7, 2008. You do not need to ship
additional mead for the medal round! We will pull the top three meads from
each category to be judged in final round judging. Winners will be
announced at the Home Mead Maker awards ceremony on Friday Evening,
February 8, 2007.

This is the largest Mead-only competition and collection of International
Meads, Mead aficionados and Mead makers in the International Mead Making
Community. If you are a Mead Maker, Mead Lover or would just like to learn
more about Mead, this is the place to be. If you only enter one Mead
competition in 2008 make it the IMA Mead Festival Home Mead Maker
Competition.

Pete Bakulic, 2008 HMMC Chairman

------------------------------

End of Mead Lover's Digest #1351
*******************************
