From: cider-request@talisman.com
Errors-To: cider-errors@talisman.com
Reply-To: cider@talisman.com
To: cider-list@talisman.com
Subject: Cider Digest #1037, 21 April 2003




Cider Digest #1037                                         21 April 2003


                 Forum for Discussion of Cider Issues
                      Dick Dunn, Digest Janitor


Contents:
  Apple of New York Reprint ("McGonegal, Charles")
  call for ciders -- Cider Day 2003 (Benjamin Watson)
  Patulin in Cider (Andrew Lea)
  Re: Patulin ("squeeze")
  'Apples of New York' ("chris horn")


Send ONLY articles for the digest to cider@talisman.com.
Use cider-request@talisman.com for subscribe/unsubscribe/admin requests.
    When subscribing, please include your name and a good address in the
    message body unless you're sure your mailer generates them.
Archives of the Digest are available at www.talisman.com/cider
----------------------------------------------------------------------


Subject: Apple of New York Reprint
From: "McGonegal, Charles" <Charles.McGonegal@uop.com>
Date: Fri, 18 Apr 2003 07:54:53 -0500


If you haven't seen one of these before, it's essentially a bound photocopy.
It looks like of like a library archive.


But it has no color - and the color plate are one of the joys of the Fruit
of New York series.


Finding that out after the fact is terribly disappointing - and a fair
number of the 'reprints' are traded on eBay.


------------------------------


Subject: call for ciders -- Cider Day 2003
From: Benjamin Watson <bwatson@monad.net>
Date: Fri, 18 Apr 2003 14:13:01 -0400


Commercial cidermakers, please take note!


The 9th Annual Franklin County Cider Day will be held on Sat. and Sun., 
November 1-2, 2003. For advance information, go to www.ciderday.org.


Last year I moderated a very successful artisan cider tasting, with 
half a dozen craft cidermakers participating on a panel, and some 150 
persons attending.


This year, I am again helping the organizers to coordinate the cider 
tastings. I am inviting any commercial cidermaker who might want to 
participate to contact me off-list if you are interested in submitting 
some of your cider to this convocation of cidermakers and enthusiasts, 
who come from all over New England, New York, and much farther afield.


Murdo Laird, a cidermaker from Napa County, CA plans to be there again 
this year, and we would especially like to encourage cidermakers from 
outside New England to participate (and even attend the event, if 
possible). The timing of the event is always the first weekend in 
November, a time when most of the harvest is in and the peak retail 
orchard season is over.


With the relaxing restrictions on interstate shipment of ciders and 
wines, there should be increased direct sales opportunities for small 
cideries. Cider Day 2003 aims to highlight and promote the impressive 
range and quality of American craft ciders The format for the Grand 
Cider Tasting will be informal, with attendees purchasing a glass for a 
small fee and being served samples of available ciders.


In addition, Slow Food U.S.A. plans to be involved with this year's 
Cider Day, and this organization has a commitment to promoting artisan 
food products, including real cider. We will be requesting a few ciders 
for a focused tasting of ciders paired with some of the best American 
artisan cheeses.


Specifically, the donation we are seeking from cidermakers is six 750 
ml. bottles (1/2 case) or equivalent volume.


If you wish to participate in this year's Cider Day program, or for 
more details, please contact me off-list at bwatson@monad.net. The 
deadline for responding is Monday, May 12th. I look forward to trying 
some interesting new ciders!


As for all you amateur cidermakers and enthusiasts, please set aside 
Nov. 1-2 and consider coming to Cider Day. It's a great event, and 
keeps getting bigger and better every year. More information will be 
posted on the event this summer and fall.


Ben Watson
Francestown, NH


------------------------------


Subject: Patulin in Cider
From: Andrew Lea <andrew_lea@compuserve.com>
Date: Sat, 19 Apr 2003 14:04:27 +0100


Bill and Dick raised this one so here goes!:


Patulin is a toxin formed in apples generally by the mould Penicillium
expansum.  In the UK and the EU it is controlled at a maximum of 50
parts per billion (legislation imminent) in apple juices and apple
products.  This value can easily be achieved by good fruit grading
before milling, except in some unusual situations where apples have been
kept in controlled atmospheres for many months and are not processed
promptly after withdrawal from store.


Patulin is destroyed by yeast so it is not found in fully fermented
ciders, as has been known since the 1970's (citations 1 and 2 below).
Its fate was the topic of a recently published study funded by the UK
Ministry of Agriculture (now Food Standards Agency) and the National
Association of Cidermakers (citation 3 below). 


However, this does not mean that it's good practice to use mouldy fruit
for cidermaking!


Andrew Lea
nr Oxford UK


- -----------------------------------


Stability of patulin to sulfur dioxide and to yeast fermentation.
Burroughs-LF
Long Ashton Res. Sta., Univ. of Bristol, Bristol BS18 9AF, UK
Journal-of-the-Association-of-Official-Analytical-Chemists; (1977) 60
(1) 100-103, 5 ref
The affinity of patulin for SO2 is much less than was previously
reported and is of little significance at the SO2 concn. (less than 200
ppm) used in the processing of apple juice and cider. However, at concn.
of 2000 ppm SO2 and 15 ppm patulin, combination was 90% complete in 2
days. Removal of SO2 liberated only part of the patulin, which suggests
that 2 mechanisms are involved: one reversible (opening the hemiacetal
ring) and one irreversible (SO2 addition at the double bond). Tests with
2 yeasts used in English commercial cider making confirmed that patulin
is effectively removed during yeast fermentation.


Disappearance of patulin during alcoholic fermentation of apple juice
Stinson-EE; Osman-SF; Huhtanen-CN; Bills-DD
Applied-and-Environmental-Microbiology; (1978) 36 (4) 620-622, 17 ref.
8 yeast strains were used in 3 typical American processes to ferment
apple juice containing 15 mg of added patulin/l. Patulin was reduced to
less than the min. detectable level of 50 mug/l in all but 2 cases; in
all cases, the level of patulin was reduced by greater than 99% during
alcoholic fermentation. In unfermented samples of apple juice, the
concn. of added patulin declined by only 10% when the juice was held for
2 wk, a period equivalent to the time required for fermentation


Fate of patulin in the presence of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Moss-MO; Long-MT
University of Surrey, UK
Food-Additives-and-Contaminants; (2002) 19 (4) 387-399, 31 ref.
The mycotoxin patulin is known to become analytically non-detectable
during the production of cider from contaminated apple juice.  The fate
of [-1-4C]-labelled patulin during the alcoholic fermentation of apple
juice was studied.  3 commercial cider strains of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae (AWY 650R, 71B and CEG) degraded patulin during active
fermentative growth, but not when growing aerobically.  The products of
patulin degradation were more polar than patulin itself and remained in
the clarified fermented cider.  Patulin did not appear to bind to yeast
cells or apple juice sediment in these model experiments.  HPLC analysis
of patulin-spiked fermentations showed the appearance of 2 major
metabolites, 1 of which corresponded by both TLC and HPLC to E-ascladiol
prepared by the chemical reduction of patulin using sodium borohydride. 
Using a diode array detector, both metabolites had a lambdamax = 271 nm,
identical to that of ascladiol.  The NMR spectrum of a crude preparation
of these metabolites showed signals corresponding to those of the
E-ascladiol prepared chemically, as a weaker set of signals
corresponding to those reported in the literature for Z-ascladiol.
- ----------------------------------


------------------------------


Subject: Re: Patulin
From: "squeeze" <squeeze@mars.ark.com>
Date: Sun, 20 Apr 2003 19:27:34 -0700


Well Dick wants to hear more about Patulin , so here's my perspective -
there is getting to be a bit more research on it, as the EU has set
standards that will have to be met by US producers wishing to export to
there, but still not a lot definitive, and major commercial producers have
never paid much attention to it.


Patulin is a mycotoxin produced by certain species of the genera
Aspergillus and Penicillium  - Penicillium expansum is the common spoilage
microorganism in apples, and the major potential dietary sources of patulin
are apples and apple juice made from fruit affected by these bugs.   Any
fruits showing visible areas of mould or rot, either on the outside of the
fruit or in the flesh, *could* contain patulin.  Fruits which appear sound
are less likely to contain patulin at detectable levels, though the open
calyx may allow various organisms to gain internal access and be growing
inside.


Patulin has also been identified in numerous other mouldy fruits,
vegetables, cereals, and animal feeds; it is stable in apple and grape
juices and in dry corn.


Patulin shouldn't be present if only undamaged apples *picked* from the
trees are used and juice is properly refrigerated. Small amounts can be
produced in apples at temperatures as low as 5 degrees C.  Regulated levels
range from 30 to 50 ug/litre in the 10 or so countries that have set
standards - mostly EU and UK. [the National Food Processors Association in
the US suggests a limit of 50ppb, and the FDA
(http://vm.cfsan.fda.gov/~dms/patubckg.html) has recently set this as the
acceptable limit - 1ppb = 1ug/litre]. Levels up to 45,000 ug/litre have
been found by some researchers.


No final word as to regulations in Canada yet, tho' now that the US has set
a standard, Canada will eventually follow.


>From quite some time ago, information I saw stated that Patulin is a liver
toxin, which would damage the liver over time w/ "high enough" levels of
consumption.  Lately, I haven't seen any newer research that mentioned
this, most focusing on cancer, with no definitive results yet found.  All
evidence I've seen indicates that once the toxin is in the product, it is
not removeable, and not modified by pasteurization - this is a "chemical",
not an organism - and I've always operated on the assumption it carries
through the fermentation stage to cider as well. The FDA says "reports
indicate" Patulin is destroyed by fermentation with no references, and the
"European Mycotoxin Awareness Network" 
(http://www.lfra.co.uk/eman/fsheet6.htm) claims that interaction w/ certain
yeasts in fermentation destroy it, tho' I've found no studies proving that,
and I'd wonder what the resultant products are.


The primary way to avoid it is to avoid grounders [which may have molds
growing inside if they've lain on the ground for long],  or anything w/ any
rot, and generally use only sound, clean fruit.  My understanding has
always been that the insidious nature of this toxin is that when you show
up w/ serious liver problems from excessive exposure, there will be no
apparent connection w/ Patulin - but the doc might ask how much alcohol you
consume!!  :-)


Bill  <http://mars.ark.com/~squeeze/>


------------------------------


Subject: 'Apples of New York'
From: "chris horn" <agent_strangelove@hotmail.com>
Date: Mon, 21 Apr 2003 14:05:08 -0700




>In case anyone's looking for a copy of Apples of New York strictly for
>information and not investment, Powell's Bookstore in Portland
>(powells.com) has a copy of a reprint for $90. (I did not know that >there 
>was a reprint.)  Also, abebooks.com has several copies of the >original 
>edition listed, for various prices and in various conditions.


Buyer beware...  All of the reprint copies of 'Apples of New York' that I 
have seen are only black and white.  Not very much help in having all those 
color plate if they are now black and white.  Save your pennys and get an 
original.  About $150-200 on Ebay of late...


Thanks
Chris Horn
Scappoose Oregon


"There is nothing worse than a brilliant image of a fuzzy concept."
              -Ansel Adams


------------------------------


End of Cider Digest #1037
*************************