From: cider-request@talisman.com
Errors-To: cider-errors@talisman.com
Reply-To: cider@talisman.com
To: cider-list@talisman.com
Subject: Cider Digest #1049, 18 June 2003




Cider Digest #1049                                         18 June 2003


                 Forum for Discussion of Cider Issues
                      Dick Dunn, Digest Janitor


Contents:
  Introduction and a question ("Cameron Adams")
  Interstate Shipping  (karl buck)
  THREE COUNTIES CIDER AND PERRY ASSOCIATION FESTIVAL (tom oliver)
  Carbonation levels (Dan Aldrich)


Send ONLY articles for the digest to cider@talisman.com.
Use cider-request@talisman.com for subscribe/unsubscribe/admin requests.
    When subscribing, please include your name and a good address in the
    message body unless you're sure your mailer generates them.
Archives of the Digest are available at www.talisman.com/cider
----------------------------------------------------------------------


Subject: Introduction and a question
From: "Cameron Adams" <cadams@mail.arczip.com>
Date: Sat, 14 Jun 2003 14:22:46 -0600


Hello all,


I have just joined the list and have enjoyed the discussion.  I 
have been brewing beer for about 10 years (off and on) and have 
brewed a cider and a mead every so often over the course.  Because 
of the large number of brewers in my social circle and the fact 
that my taste for hops seems to have waned, I have decided to focus 
more heavily on ciders and meads.


As a urban apartment dweller, I have no grove and only recently 
have gained access to a press.  Because of this I have always made 
my cider from apple juice concentrate.  My last batch, for instance 
was made with 19 12oz. cans of concentrate (store brand, mixed 
apples, with ascorbic acid and no preservatives) and enough water 
to bring it up to 5 gallons.  I boiled the concentrate with about 2 
gallons of water for 15 minutes and added it to the carbouy with 
cold water.  When cool I pitched a champagne yeast.  It fermented 
to completion in just over a week (extremely dry).


My question regards the flavor of this concoction.


The flavor was quite good and very dry.  However, there was a 
strange aftertaste.  It was an unusual sweetness that had a 
saccharine like tint.  For some reason, I think it seemed kind of 
like lactase (I used this sugar to make an old ale years ago, but I 
really can't be sure if the flavor really matches up).


Does anyone have any idea about what might have caused this flavor?


I appreciate any information about how to cure this because I will 
gave access to a friend's apples and press to make a real cider 
later this summer and would like to produce a quality product.  


Thanks,
Cam  


------------------------------


Subject: Interstate Shipping 
From: karl buck <buckandco@usa.net>
Date: Sat, 14 Jun 2003 16:46:53 -0400




 Hello,


  This is in response to the number of inquiries about the interstate shipment
of cider.  Although specifically not regarding cider, rather the issue of
wine, the public interest lawfirm of Institute for Justice, has litigated
successfully for interstate shipment of wine in the Sate of New York. The
Institute for Justice represents small businesses (I believe they take cases
pro-bono when such are for issues of individual liberties)
and individuals with cases mostly relating to governmental restrictions.


   You can look at their website to garner more information about interstate
shipment and the possibility of contacting them for specificate assistance
with your small cider business. They run an entrepreneurship program to help
small businesses with legal issuses.


    Visit them online:   http://www.ij.org


Good luck to all of you with establishing your cider ventures!


Karl Buck


------------------------------


Subject: THREE COUNTIES CIDER AND PERRY ASSOCIATION FESTIVAL
From: tom oliver <troliver@compuserve.com>
Date: Mon, 16 Jun 2003 23:27:53 +0100


Just to remind everyone on the cider digest that it would be great to see as
many as possible at our first cider and perry festival at The Dragon Inn,
The Tything in Worcester, UK (tel.01905 25845) on Friday June 20 6pm-11pm
and Saturday June 21 midday-11pm.


We will have ciders and/or perries in draught and/or bottle from Barkers,
Tardebigge, Gwatkin, Butford Organics, Hartlands, Frome Valley, Smart and
Hodgkins, Ross on Wye Cider and Perry Co, (aka Broome Farm), Brook Farm,
Wittenham Hill, Gregg's Pit, Oliver's, Newton Court, Pershore College, Jus,
Haigs, Merlin Brewery, Westons, Ledbury Cider and Perry Company,and there
may be more on the night!


This festival is with the very kind help and support of Chris and Richard
from The Dragon Inn. The Dragon Inn is within 5 minutes walk of Worcester
Foregate Street railway station. There are a bunch of B&B's less than 10
minutes walk from the inn. Food will be available at times tbc.


We aim to have all producers who supply the festival to be "behind the bar"
for at least 3-6 hours over the 2 days of the festival, so please come along
and enjoy a great selection of ciders and perries and talk to the producers
of probably some of the best ciders and perries in the world.


We aim to make this an annual event to which cider and perry makers and
consumers from all round the world would be very welcome.


------------------------------


Subject: Carbonation levels
From: Dan Aldrich <daldrich@earthlink.net>
Date: Tue, 17 Jun 2003 20:34:18 -0400


Just tried some of my sparkling cider last night and was disappointed w/
the level of carbonation. Used a 12oz can of apple concentrate for a 5
gallon batch per a recommendation off the net.


What are the list members carbonating their sparkling ciders with?


Thanks,
- -d


------------------------------


End of Cider Digest #1049
*************************