From: cider-request@talisman.com
Errors-To: cider-errors@talisman.com
Reply-To: cider@talisman.com
To: cider-list@talisman.com
Subject: Cider Digest #1061, 3 August 2003




Cider Digest #1061                                         3 August 2003


                 Forum for Discussion of Cider Issues
                      Dick Dunn, Digest Janitor


Contents:
  Re: Defining "real cider" (Benjamin Watson)
  Re: real cider ("T. J. Higgins")
  Re: Defining cider (Terence L Bradshaw)
  "Real Cider"  (Tim Bray)
  Re:"Real Cider" (Tim Bray)
  the adjective "real" (Dick Dunn)


Send ONLY articles for the digest to cider@talisman.com.
Use cider-request@talisman.com for subscribe/unsubscribe/admin requests.
    When subscribing, please include your name and a good address in the
    message body unless you're sure your mailer generates them.
Archives of the Digest are available at www.talisman.com/cider
----------------------------------------------------------------------


Subject: Re: Defining "real cider"
From: Benjamin Watson <bwatson@monad.net>
Date: Thu, 31 Jul 2003 13:36:48 -0400


I knew that if I posted my thoughts and questions on this topic in 
Cider Digest, I would get 1) very thoughtful and informed opinions from 
everyone, and 2) far more detail than will ever get used in the final 
criteria.


Thanks to everyone for your input -- this is all incredibly valuable. 
Please keep weighing in if there's more to say on the subject. For now, 
here are a few general thoughts I had after reading everyone's comments:


1. I agree that Slow Food should have a broad, but still meaningful, 
definition of "artisanal cider." And I agree that as much as I dislike 
that term, it is still probably better than "real cider," which can 
sound rather superior and snotty.


2. I like the suggestion of stipulating that artisan cider should be 
made from at least 90% fresh pressed apple juice. No concentrates, no 
pasteurized juice, no added water, etc. That means something -- and 
Slow Food is very concerned about the "organoleptic" quality of foods 
that they promote. I would argue that cider made from concentrates or 
from pasteurized juice tastes markedly different. Would I drink it? 
Sure -- I don't mind the occasional bottle of Hard Core or K, which I 
quite like . . . but I don't consider them "artisan ciders," and partly 
for the reason that they use concentrate.


However, I do agree with Andrew and others that in-bottle 
pasteurization AFTER primary fermentation is probably okay, and the 
same goes for other things like force-carbonation and dosage with sugar 
or apple juice.


3. While I think that an artisan cider can be made from pressed juice, 
I do agree with Dick that the closer the producer is to the fruit, the 
better. If he/she buys in (or, better yet, grows) the apples, there's 
more control than buying pressed juice, unless you're buying in 
specific single-variety juice for blending. I wouldn't exclude anyone 
on this account.


4. The standard for single varieties in wine seems to stipulate a 75% 
content by volume if you want to call something by a single variety 
name. Otherwise, different varieties would need to be listed on the 
label. Again, I don't know that this is a big deal -- I'm just trying 
to get a grip on what we mean.


5. Based on my own inclinations, and the comments of various people, I 
would exclude from the category of "artisan cider" any product that 
include honey, raisins or other fruit or juice, as well as 
preservatives (sorbates) or saccharin/sugar substitutes. In terms of 
added sugar, it seems that we could stipulate not chaptalizing the 
juice above a certain level pre-fermentation -- maybe we say 2% Brix; 
maybe we simply say that you can't chaptalize above a final abv. of 9% 
- -- though those lucky buggers in California who get high natural sugars 
in the fruit would certainly qualify.


While I like the idea of different classifications within the broad 
term "cider," I think Slow Food's criteria need to be more restrictive. 
We all know what can be done with specialty ciders (and I've had, and 
made, some great ones), but for the artisanal cider selection, I think 
we want to emphasize the expression of the apple itself and not so much 
the art or artifice of the producer.


Anyway, please send along any more thoughts you have to this Digest, 
and I'll continue to mull it over before I make my final 
recommendations to Slow Food USA.


Ben Watson


------------------------------


Subject: Re: real cider
From: "T. J. Higgins" <tjhiggin@ant.hiwaay.net>
Date: Thu, 31 Jul 2003 13:12:23 -0500 (CDT)


Scott wrote:
>One last thing:  I really dislike the term "real cider".  The 
>holier-than-thou attitude implied by the term just gets under my skin.  
>"Artisanal cider"?


Integer cider?  Whole cider?  Rational cider?  Non-terminating,
non-repeating decimal cider?  :^) :^) :^)


Smart-aleck-ness aside, I agree with you.  Maybe the connotation in
the UK is different, where they have CAMRA, but here in the USA, the
word "real" does have holier-than-thou implications.


Besides "artisanal," which doesn't necessarily roll off the tongue 
easily, some other possible synonyms for "real" are "genuine" and 
"authentic."  Of these, I think I prefer "authentic."


T.J. Higgins, with a degree in Mathematics, as if you couldn't tell :^)
Huntsville, AL


------------------------------


Subject: Re: Defining cider
From: Terence L Bradshaw <madshaw@innevi.com>
Date: Thu, 31 Jul 2003 17:51:13 -0400


Thank you Ben for opening up this discussion which, along with the 
thinning/alternance issue has picked things up considerably.  I have been 
lurking for awhile here, but I feel that I should weigh in on this matter, 
if my opinions hold court.


Looking at the original topic, that is defining artisanal ciders for 
inclusion in a Slow Foods publication, I think we can have for ourselves a 
broad category here.  Of course any real cider must be 100% apple juice, or 
pear if that's the case.  Pre-ferment pasteurization? What is the problem 
with it?  I agree that pasteurized sweet cider is not the same as the 
original stuff, but if one is to manage a fermentation, how is cleaning the 
juice through pasteurization different than by using sulfites?  I doubt 
that many commercial 'real' cider makers pasteurize their fresh must or 
plan to, but I don't see why we should rule this out.  Newer pasteurizer 
technology results in a much smaller flavor change, and if a cidermaker can 
make a sulfite-free product using this tool, why exclude them?  The same 
goes for UV treatment, which I feel could have a place in cider/winemaking.
Certainly traditional fermentation aids (sulfites, yeasts) must be 
allowed.  Honey? Sugar? Raisins? If the style calls for it, then I say let 
them in.  Let's look at the practical matter here where a cidermaker 
generally wants to achieve at least  some consistency in their 
product.  Added sugars are an important and traditional tool to help with 
this. The limit on alcohol level is reasonable, although the style again 
may allow for differences, such as in a New England cider where it can get 
up there pretty high.


I'll stop before I go down each point one by one, and suggest what might 
not be included, and that is any artificial ingredients (not fermentation 
aids), and no back-watering, which seems only to be done on the alco-pop 
scale.  All of us here know what makes real cider...apple juice, fermented 
according to a particular style.  I will join in with the others who have 
called for a broad umbrella to define the real stuff, with sub-categories 
thereafter if we want to differentiate further.  With the industry as small 
as it is in the U.S., we are not in the position to be exclusive.


This talk reminds me of a fly fishing newsgroup I use to lurk on, where a 
trout is not a trout unless caught on a number 14 or smaller dry fly cast 
from a fast-action rod, with a dragless drift taken in a freestone, or 
preferably chalkstream creek. I don't read such drivel anymore, and I still 
don't catch a lot of trout by any method. There is a difference between 
tossing a worm and bobber in a pond on the side of the road and stalking 
the fish in their environment, getting wet while setting up just the right 
cast be it a spinner, fly, grasshopper, or even a worm.


Singling out only the purest ciders, made by the grower him/herself, with 
only fresh-pressed unadulterated juice from unsprayed bittersweets on 
seedling rootstock does not guarantee a better tasting product, yet 
snobbishly rejects those who make a good product by other reasonable 
means.  Those pure ciders can exist in a style of their own within the real 
cider category, but let's not close the book on everyone else.


Just my $0.02


TerryB


Terence Bradshaw
1189 Wheeler Road
Calais, VT 05648
madshaw@innevi.com
(802)229-2004


The views represented by me are mine and mine only................


------------------------------


Subject: "Real Cider" 
From: Tim Bray <tbray@mcn.org>
Date: Thu, 31 Jul 2003 14:16:21 -0700


I'm combining responses to several different messages here - hope this 
isn't too confusing:


>Given the fledgling stage of cider culture here in the US, seems to me it
>would be wise to define cider as broadly as possible, to allow room for as
>many producers to flourish as possible.


Except that isn't the expressed purpose of this particular definition.  Ben 
is looking for something restrictive, that will have meaning to the Slow 
Foods people.


I would say the _existing_ definition of cider (if there is one) is "as 
broad as possible" since it includes drinks made mostly from sugar.  This 
is counter-productive to the goal of getting more people interested in cider.


The only reason we even have to do this is the fact that "Cider" has been 
appropriated by the fermented-sugar producers.  So now we have to make an 
artificial distinction between "Cider" and "Real Cider."


> > In-bottle pasteurization, when done properly, should be greatly encouraged
> > for medium and sweet ciders, even some dry ciders would benefit.


How does a dry cider benefit from pasteurization?


>  If sterile
> > filtering is allowed, in-bottle pasteurization should be also.


I agree with that  - either include or exclude them both.


>I believe only the essential requirements should be placed in any cider
>standard.


Agreed.   To be useful, the definition of Real Cider needs to be simple and 
direct - something that can be communicated easily to anyone not familiar 
with the processes and terminology.


>  Does anyone talk about
>"real" wine with no sulfites, no tannin used during clarification, no
>malo-lactic culture added, etc etc?  Of course not!


Maybe not, but I think they do make a distinction between "real" wine made 
from fermented grape (or other fruit) juice, and "fake" wine made from 
fermented corn sugar with added flavorings (natural and artificial).  Don't 
they?


>There are already standards here in the wine world, and rather
>than reinventing the wheel, it makes sense to adopt a variation on what
>they do.


Well, let's hear about them.  Is there any analogous designation for what 
we are trying to achieve?


>One last thing:  I really dislike the term "real cider".  The
>holier-than-thou attitude implied by the term just gets under my skin.
>"Artisanal cider"?


Same implication, same problem.  I like "Artisanal" better, but I also 
think we will get bogged down even more in technicalities on that 
one.  Let's keep the objective in mind:  A simple, understandable term and 
a clear, easily communicated definition.  "Real Cider" is probably better 
in that regard.


>Now, sure, most folks can't just plant their own
>orchard and start making cider from start to finish.  It takes a bit of
>land, a fair bit of work, and perhaps a minimum of five years before
>you've got trees in production and old enough to make good cider.  But
>isn't there some merit, some reason for recognition, for the folks who
>do?


Absolutely!  And this is where I think a term like "Artisanal Cider" might 
be useful: restricted to ciders that are directly linked to the 
orchards.  You don't have to have your own orchard, but you have to source 
your fruit.  "Artisanal" starts with fruit, not juice.


>  And even if the commitment and cost of the land and the time for
>setting up an orchard isn't an option, buying or building a small press
>should be within reach of anyone who's becoming crazy-serious about making
>cider.


Or even a medium-sized to large one, and relationships with local 
orchardists.


Cheers,
Tim Bray
Senlac Cider
(still not in commercial production!)
Albion, CA


------------------------------


Subject: Re:"Real Cider"
From: Tim Bray <tbray@mcn.org>
Date: Thu, 31 Jul 2003 15:15:32 -0700




>So far in two years I have been unable to
>find a ready supply of unpasteurized juice.


You have to go to the orchards that press their own juice; and find the 
guys who sell direct to consumers.   Up here in Mendocino County there are 
a couple of them, and I think at least one in Sonoma County.  But why not 
buy apples, grind and press your own juice?


>I don't think I
>need to go into the Odwalla problems and what appears to be
>a legal mandate that all juice- if you don't own your own
>orchard- must be pasteurized.


It's not a legal mandate.  FDA requires a consumer warning if the juice is 
NOT pasteurized.  I believe they do also require a HACCP for unpasteurized 
juice.  Market forces and liability suits are the main reasons why 
unpasteurized juice is so hard to find.


>So Ben, I would suggest that the issue of pasteurization be
>taken off the table.


This I have to disagree with.  We're talking about commercial production 
here, not hobbyists.  Anyone who seriously wants to produce Real Cider in 
commercial quantities is going to have to locate a source of fruit and 
press their own juice, or work with an orchard that will custom-press the 
fruit.  Why would anyone choose to buy processed juice, which is far more 
expensive, as a raw material?


FDA is aware of the studies that show E. coli does not survive the 
fermentation process, so I doubt we will see pasteurization required for 
cider-making.


Even for the hobbyist, it's not that difficult or expensive to make a 
small-scale grinder and press setup.  Mine started with a kitchen "garbage 
disposal" grinder (under $100) and a mechanic's press (about $150); if you 
build your own frame you only have to buy the hydraulic jack (under 
$50).  Then you can buy the apples you want, grinding and pressing your own 
blend!


Cheers,
Tim Bray
Albion, CA


------------------------------


Subject: the adjective "real"
From: rcd@talisman.com (Dick Dunn)
Date: Fri,  1 Aug 2003 15:51:48 -0600 (MDT)


Mixed in with the discussion of what defines a real cider, some folks are
not quite happy with the choice of the specific word "real".


I think the origin is with CAMRA, where "real ale" was defined to be a
traditional ale, finished in the cask so that it's naturally carbonated
("naturally" meaning here the normal result of fermentation).  This same
label of "real" with somewhat the same sense was transferred to cider.  I
think that's as good a reason as any to look for a different adjective to
name what we're trying to define.  After all, I don't see anyone in the
current discussion insisting that the presence of live yeast is essential.
Leave the phrase "real cider" to CAMRA/APPLE for what they're trying to
define and advocate for, and let's come up with another term that won't
get tangled in with CAMRA's ideas.


How?  I don't know...off to the thesaurus, I guess.  Got to be careful with
terms like "pure" though, because those are starting to get legal meanings
which may be more or less than we want.


Dick


------------------------------


End of Cider Digest #1061
*************************