From: cider-request@talisman.com
Errors-To: cider-errors@talisman.com
Reply-To: cider@talisman.com
To: cider-list@talisman.com
Subject: Cider Digest #1089, 5 November 2003




Cider Digest #1089                                         5 November 2003


                 Forum for Discussion of Cider Issues
                      Dick Dunn, Digest Janitor


Contents:
  More about Sturmer (Lawrence L Senters)
  Wild yeast fermentations (Jen)
  UV Treatment (Richard Nelson)
  Freezing apple juice ("Ira Edwards")
  Franklin County Cider Day (Dick Dunn)


Send ONLY articles for the digest to cider@talisman.com.
Use cider-request@talisman.com for subscribe/unsubscribe/admin requests.
    When subscribing, please include your name and a good address in the
    message body unless you're sure your mailer generates them.
Archives of the Digest are available at www.talisman.com/cider
----------------------------------------------------------------------


Subject: More about Sturmer
From: lsenters@toledotel.com (Lawrence L Senters)
Date: Thu, 30 Oct 2003 16:58:21 -0800 (PST)


In Apples for the 21st Century, Warren Manhart confirms most of what's
already been noted in previous digests.  Based on his experience in the
Willamette Valley (Oregon) he says: "Medium size tree.  Annual bearer."
"...somewhat susceptible to apple scab fungus and canker diseases in damp,
mild winter climates.  Bloom...mid-to late-season...suggest growing in USDA
zones 6 through 9...Size is medium to large...shape is usually oblate to
round-conic....Flavor is very tart, almost sour , until ripe, when it has a
rich, high flavor....I like it better than Bramley...seems to have more
sugar and is a fine tasting apple when picked in this valley in early
November....very good all-purpose apple with rather fine-grained white
flesh....have fruited it for five years (in 1995) on MARK rootstock and am
sufficiently impressed to include it (in this book), especially for the
longer season areas....somewhat similar to Karmine in flavor, and should be
grown one or two USDA zones farther south than the northern limit of
Karmine.  If you can ripen Arkansas Black, Granny Smith or Braeburn, it
would be worth a try."


Larry Senters


------------------------------


Subject: Wild yeast fermentations
From: Jen <jclaster@localnet.com>
Date: Mon, 3 Nov 2003 06:18:31 -0500


I recently put up my first batch of cider without pitched yeasts.  I 
added sulfites at 45 ppm, put an airlock on, and now, after a week, 
still see no sign of bubbling.  My question is for those more 
experienced with this process than I- when do you start to worry?  
Happy cidering all!


------------------------------


Subject: UV Treatment
From: Richard Nelson <rgnelson@worldnet.att.net>
Date: Mon, 03 Nov 2003 19:50:24 -0500


Hello,


Another beginner question.


What effect does UV treatment of sweet juice have? Does it kill off all bugs
- - both the good and bad? What are the pros and cons of using UV treated
juice? Does UV treatment eliminate the need for Campden Tablets?


For my first two batches of cider, I'm planning on adding yeast - Wyeast
#3766 Cider for one and Wyeast #3021 Pasteur Champagne for the other.


If I used UV treated juice, would the chance for a malic acid to lactic acid
reduction be eliminated? Would I have to introduce a malo-lactic culture?


Thank you,


Dick Nelson
Dover, Massachusetts 


------------------------------


Subject: Freezing apple juice
From: "Ira Edwards" <ira_j_e@hotmail.com>
Date: Tue, 04 Nov 2003 18:18:46 +0000


Hi all,


well I have finished pressing and getting all of my ciders fermenting as of 
a few weeks ago.  this was a good year for collecting apples and I ended up 
with about 10 gallons to freeze after getting 40 gallons of 8 diferent 
ciders going.  I froxe the juice in empty milk jugs filled ALMOST all the 
way up (to account forthe ~10% expansion fo freezing)  I looked in my chest 
freezer the other day and dicovered a mess!


8 of the jugs had cracked and leaked some frozen slush onto the freezer 
floor....:(  not too bad, but it is stilll going to be a mess to clean when 
I get a  ROUND TUIT.


what have you out there in Cider-Land done to preserve your apple juice for 
further drinking or cooking use?


thanks for the info!


- -Ira Edwards
Anchorage, AK


------------------------------


Subject: Franklin County Cider Day
From: rcd@talisman.com (Dick Dunn)
Date: Wed,  5 Nov 2003 09:33:12 -0700 (MST)


This past weekend was Franklin County Cider Day (two days) in Franklin
County, Massachusetts.  Despite the best efforts of construction crews in
Colorado, I managed to find my way there.  It was great!  As noted last
year, it has become the gathering point for craft cider-makers in the US.
If you're seriously interested in cider, you ought to try to make it to
this event next year.  It's the first weekend in November.


Here's my overview, although there was more going on than one person could
capture.  See www.ciderday.org for the actual schedule of events.


This is a festival focused on apples and cider.  Several orchards in the
area were open to tours, and were pressing blends specifically intended for
hard cider.  People arrived with pickups loaded with carboys and Corny kegs
to be filled, to take home and start this fall's cider.


The first day, the main festival was in the "brick meeting house" (an old
church) in Colrain.  Weather was warm and dry.  There were tables set up
outside by one orchardist, for tasting various (mostly eating/cooking)
apples, with most of the varieties for sale as well in small quantity.  I
would guess there were several dozen varieties, maybe more.


There was an orchard-equipment supplier with the usual assortment of hand
tools and ladders.


In the meeting house, there were sessions on amateur/home cider making,
pruning, grafting (slight demo despite the time of year), and cider tastings
later in the day.  One cider-tasting featured six cider-makers speaking
about their products as samples were poured.  The second was simply an open
tasting of about a dozen craft ciders.


I counted the following cider-makers:
  * West County, MA
  * Farnum Hill, NH
  * Russell Orchards, MA
  * Furnace Brook, MA
    Flag Hill, VT
    White Oak, OR
    Ford Farms, OR
    Westcott Bay, WA
    Sow's Ear, ME
  * Traditional Co., OR
  * Murdo's, CA
    AEppelTreow, WI
    Rhyne, CA
The cider-makers themselves were present for the ones marked with *.


I heard that Gwatkin cider and perry "in cask" (actually polypin) is going
to be introduced at a few selected outlets in the US soon.  Gwatkin is a
craft producer in the UK.  I'm of two minds on this.  On the positive, it
may introduce English West Country styles to some US customers who can
appreciate them, and help promote cider (and particularly perry, which is
nearly unknown here).  On the negative, first there is a substantial chance
that it won't survive the trip graciously and will give cider a bad name.
Second, cider in cask (as with ale in cask) ought to be a local product;
it shouldn't be necessary (nor seen as desirable) to ship it 3000 miles.


Sunday afternoon featured a cider/cheese tasting, with Ben Watson as one of
the speakers; the other was a cheesemonger.  This was six ciders paired with
six local/regional cheeses: a fresh chevre, an aged rather nutty white
cheese, a camembert (could as well have been called a brie), one I'm hard-
put to describe but hard and slightly sharp, a farm-style white cheddar, and
a blue.  (Maybe Ben can fill in what I forgot.)  They did pretty well on the
pairings.  After going through their explicit choices, we each went back
and tested various combinations of cheese and cider.  To my surprise, there
were a few truly bad combinations, but only a few.  If one were to host a
party and offer cider and cheese, it would require tasting in advance; it's
not a gimme that they'll go together.


All through the weekend I had people coming up and introducing themselves
because they were subscribers to the CD.  I'll never remember a fraction
of the names, but there were lots of CD folks.


Special thanks to Terry and Judith Maloney (West County), the hosts/organizers
of the event (and it was indeed very well organized).  This is a lot of
work, and done for no compensation other than the benefit to the world of
cider, and to their community.  Terry and Judith are such nice, generous
people...as were all of the folks I met the various orchards and other
events.  Thanks to Ben Watson as well for MCing several sessions plus I
don't know how much behind-the-scenes work.
- ---
Dick Dunn          rcd@talisman.com          Hygiene, Colorado  USA


------------------------------


End of Cider Digest #1089
*************************