From: cider-request@talisman.com
Errors-To: cider-errors@talisman.com
Reply-To: cider@talisman.com
To: cider-list@talisman.com
Subject: Cider Digest #1102, 28 December 2003




Cider Digest #1102                                         28 December 2003


                 Forum for Discussion of Cider Issues
                      Dick Dunn, Digest Janitor


Contents:
  Re: BJCP and cider judging ("Bill Slack")
  cider styles and NY Times tasting (Benjamin Watson)
  RE: BJCP bashing ("Brian Lundeen")
  Re: BJCP competitions (Terence Bradshaw)


Send ONLY articles for the digest to cider@talisman.com.
Use cider-request@talisman.com for subscribe/unsubscribe/admin requests.
    When subscribing, please include your name and a good address in the
    message body unless you're sure your mailer generates them.
Archives of the Digest are available at www.talisman.com/cider
----------------------------------------------------------------------


Subject: Re: BJCP and cider judging
From: "Bill Slack" <wrs@slack.org>
Date: Fri, 26 Dec 2003 16:38:34 -0500


First, let me introduce myself and my background.  I have lurked on this
list a long time, even back when Jay ran it,  but don't think I've ever
posted.  I have made beer, mead and cider (I even made scrumpy once with raw
meat) since 1986.  I have been a beer judge most of that time and have
judged at over 100 competitions.  I judge ciders and meads as well, and am
usually assigned to those categories by the competition organisers in the
Northeast where I do most of my judging.  A significant number of BJCP
judges  in the northeast who judge cider or mead learned to do so either
from me or from someone who learned from me.  I judged at the AHA cider
nationals, including BOS, for eight years in a row.  I have been elected by
the judges in my region to the Board of Directors of the BJCP three times
and I am currently serving out my sixth year in that position.  I served as
President of the BJCP until I resigned from that post recently after five
years in that ofice.  I have made several hundred gallons of cider and I
always do a batch or two every year.  More to the point, I am also the
author of the current cider section of the BJCP style guidelines.


I feel I must explain a few things.  First of all, the BJCP assuredly does
not, nor did it ever, think cider or mead were varieties of beer.  Our
motivation to include them was to provide a disciplined and consistent way
to evaluate these homemade products.  No one else was doing it  and we
stepped into the gap.  We also considered doing the same for homebrewed sake
but that activity has not yet reached the critical mass needed to make it
worth doing.  But I assure you, we consider mead, cider, sake, wine, etc. to
all be legitimate beverages in their own right and they  are certainly not
beer.  BTW, we occasionally think about applying our disciplines to the
sensory evaluation of wine, but there is already a huge body of people doing
that and we probably wouldn't be welcome.


As to the current guidelines:  We certainly know that there are more than
three categories of cider.  When the BJCP style guidelines were being
reviewed and rewritten a few years ago, I was asked to rewrite the cider
section.  Previously, they were essentially the old AHA guidelines written
by Paul Correnty (who taught me most of what I know about apples and cider).
It was obvious that a complete taxonomy of cider and perry styles, while
hugely desirable from a cider aficionado's point of view, woud simply be too
unwieldy for what people were experiencing in entries in competitions.
Routinely, organizers would have to collapse categories in order to be able
to judge the entries and award prizes.  I rewrote the guidelines with the
intent to identify the categories that the entries typically were collapsed
into based on our experince during the past year.  Its purpose was to make
the competitions less unwieldy, not to deny the existence of all the worthy
categories of cider and perry, especially those styles from the UK, France
and Northern Spain.  I will happilly support a rewrite of these guidelines
if the competition organizers want me to.


I hope this clears things up.


And keep up the good work, this is a great forum.


Bill Slack
Representative for the Northeast Region
Board of Directors
Beer Judge Certification Program, Inc.


------------------------------


Subject: cider styles and NY Times tasting
From: Benjamin Watson <bwatson@monad.net>
Date: Fri, 26 Dec 2003 16:58:11 -0500


Gary Awdey wrote:


> I confess to having ambivalent feelings about cider judging as a part of
> BJCP unless the judging is meant to be personal and outside of what most
> people would consider to be competition.  It's great that cider tasting
> events are being promoted.  It just bothers me that this is being done under
> the name "beer" and it bothers me that this is being done to a
> "certification" (implying that a high level of competence has been achieved)
> rather than as a process of gradual, enjoyable and ongoing personal
> enlightenment (Or am I alone in thinking this?).


You're not alone by any means, Gary. But with the increasingly high 
profile of cider, it's apparent that people are still using either beer 
or wine as a point of reference for what they're tasting.


I agree that most cider is more akin to wine, except the industrial or 
draft ciders that are made with pasteurized juice (or more commonly 
cooked-down concentrate) -- those operations are more akin to brewing, 
and perhaps that style of cider is appropriate to include in a beer 
tasting. Or, for that matter, the real "draft" ciders of England, which 
are casked and contain live yeast. In a sense they are analagous to 
real ale.


But ever since Lord Scudamore's time in 17th century England, cider in 
bottles has always been more akin to wine, in terms of connoisseurship 
as well as production. And although one can apply a lot of taste 
descriptors to artisanal cider that would be familiar to a wine 
connoisseur, I think that again this is mainly for the sake of 
reference when comparing different ciders in a tasting -- it's not to 
imply that cider is exactly analagous to wine.


This was brought home to me forcefully today when I read Eric Asimov's 
tasting notes ("Ciders of the Times") in Wednesday's NY Times, referred 
to in the previous CD edition.


Asimov is an intelligent guy, as are the rest of the tasters, including 
my friend Garrett Oliver from Brooklyn Brewery and Slow Food USA. But 
their tasting was all over the place -- clearly none of them knew much 
about cider. That's not a criticism, really -- they're just at the same 
level of knowledge that most of us were at several years ago.


The panel obviously preferred one particular style (Normandy cider), 
and the ones they selected are well made and good examples. As to the 
rest of the choices . . . they picked Original Sin as the best American 
cider? Maybe I've been unfair to these folks, but I don't know who the 
hell makes this stuff, and have only been able to buy it on draft at 
one pub in New York City. I was supremely underwhelmed by it -- it 
seemed very thin and watery, sort of the hard-cider equivalent of 
ciderkin.


The panel also liked the Farnum Hill Extra-Dry Still, which I like too 
but which is at the other end of the spectrum from French cidre -- it;s 
dry and tannic and acidic all at once, and way too austere for most 
American drinkers. And it's interesting to note that FH beat out 
Woodchuck Dark N'Dry (ugh) and Hornsby's (double ugh) by half a star.


My point is that I think it's unfair to lump all ciders together like 
this, regardless of style, simply because there are so few ciders out 
there and you can do so. It's as if the Times decided to do a wine 
tasting panel comparing together various chardonnays, cabernet 
sauvignons, and muscat dessert wines. Lumping all ciders together is 
just as senseless.


I'm trying to be charitable and remember that back in 1997 I conducted 
my own first blind tasting in this way -- just throwing vastly 
different ciders together based on whatever I could find. But I've 
learned a few things since then, and maybe the Times will become more 
sophisticated too. But it will take people who "get" cider -- like the 
folks on this Digest, and the producers themselves -- to keep educating 
consumers and food writers alike. We're just at the beginning of 
enlightenment, I suspect -- which offers exciting opportunities, but is 
also frustrating for us. As if we're standing on a ledge above the 
trail, and watching the hikers down below treeline, and yelling "Come 
ON! The view up here is great!"


I agree with someone who once said of "competitions" that there is 
really no one who is yet qualified to be a cider judge -- the various 
individual styles made by cidermakers in the U.S. are just beginning to 
reflect a character and a quality that lends itself to comparison 
across particular narrow categories. But, please, let's at least agree 
to separate draft cider and artisanal cider into two different classes. 
They're not produced in the same way, so they shouldn't be lumped 
together in a tasting.


It's human nature to try and rank different products against each other 
and try to select the "best". But cider is such an idiosyncratic and 
personal drink right now, that I'm not sure what we gain by pitting 
cideries against each other, even in friendly competition. There are 
few standards, and no one truly qualified to judge -- unless the 
categories are strictly limited and pre-selected by type. For instance, 
you could set up an ice cider tasting, or a pommeau tasting, or a 
tasting of West Country ciders or perries -- but to paint with a 
broader brush than that strikes me as simply an exercise in futility.


Ben Watson


------------------------------


Subject: RE: BJCP bashing
From: "Brian Lundeen" <blundeen@rrc.mb.ca>
Date: Fri, 26 Dec 2003 16:40:52 -0600




> Subject: Re: Cider Digest #1100, 22 December 2003
> From: "Gary Awdey" <gawdey@att.net>
> Date: Tue, 23 Dec 2003 13:31:50 -0500
>
> The 25th style of beer is mead.  The 26th
> style of beer is cider. (I'm not making this up; See
> http://www.mv.com/ipusers/slack/bjcp/style-index.html).
> Presumably the
> yet-to-be-added 27th style of beer is wine and the 49th will
> be tequila.
>
> I didn't mean to be snippy, but do want to point out the
> absurdity of classifying cider as a type of beer.
>


I'm going to try and keep my tone as friendly as possible, given that your
sarcasm has rather annoyed me. The BJCP is not so ignorant as to consider
cider or mead as types of beers. They are simply offering categories for
ciders and meads to be judged as part of BJCP sanctioned events.


> The other thing that bothers me about this is the risk that a
> relatively active beer group will fill a niche and slow the
> development of an
> independent organization for promotion of cider.


Well guess what, the only thing slowing you and mead lovers down is a
complete lack of action on your parts to develop something comparable. Don't
like ciders being judged by people who have only tasted a handful of
examples? Then create a CJCP (and MJCP) and start holding events that are up
to your standards. Look, we brewers know that we are not mead and cider
experts. Dick has told us so. ;-) But until such time as you want to take
the initiative and create organizations that better meet your needs, why not
try thanking the BJCP for at least offering a place for cider and mead
makers to compete, however flawed they might be. And instead of chastizing
the OP for his original request for commercial examples as being
insufficient, credit him for not just going out and picking up a bottle of
Strongbow, and deciding that was enough for his purposes.


Brian


------------------------------


Subject: Re: BJCP competitions
From: Terence Bradshaw <madshaw@innevi.com>
Date: Fri, 26 Dec 2003 20:38:06 -0500


I can weigh some thoughts in on the competition thing...
I have entered ciders in beer competitions before, and never have scored 
well.  I have always been put off first by the inclusion of cider as a 
category of beer, but more importantly by the three supposed styles of 
ciders, most of which seem to be based on sweet six-pack types ("would you 
like the 'amber draft' or the 'raspberry' XXXchuck/jack?").  The only true 
cider style suggested, in my opinion, is the New England-Style cider, of 
which the BJCP folks cannot give a commercial example and therefore cannot 
suggest to a judge what it really tastes like.  Of course NE cider is only 
one small segment of the 'real cider' category (see the discussion from a 
couple of months ago), so we can say that most certified judges have not 
tasted what we call 'real cider'.  Looking at the ciders that usually win 
the national competitions, most are made from standard orchard juice 
fermented either wild or with champagne yeast and then back-sweetened with 
a can of concentrate.  Sounds like a Bulmer's  product to me.  The 
suggestion that cider should properly be clear and taste and smell 
predominantly of apple also suggests either industrial ciders or extremely 
well-made french ciders which have either been filtered of undergone 
meticulous methode champenoise.
My point is, these beer guys wouldn't know an authentic cider if it kicked 
them in the backside.  Interestingly, my highest scoring cider based on the 
BJCP sheet (score 33) was the one I was least proud of...very young, not 
even fully fermented, bottled and tasted within a week (the comp was very 
close by) and therefore tasting of apple juice.  The blend was completely 
commercial fruit...Empire, Cortland, Haralson, etc., and was tossed 
together quickly to make some cider vs. no cider at all.  What I consider 
to have been my best batch, which was a hearty, tannic, estery cider 
tasting little of apples but much of cider scored in the low 20's.
If you would like to look for commercial styles of the cider categories 
(back to the original question), I would recommend any ciders from Flag 
Hill (Vershire, VT), Farnum Hill (Lebanon NH; 
http://www.farnumhillciders.com/), or West County Winery (Colrain, MA; 
<http://www.westcountywinery.com/>http<http://www.westcountywinery.com/>://w 
ww.westcountywinery.com) .  These are only a few outfits here in the northeast.


Just my $0.02


Terry B


>Al Boyce wrote:
>
> >We are preparing for our 2004 BJCP class, and I would like to present some
> >excellent examples of Ciders for evaluation practice.  What commercially
> >available examples would you recommend for A) Standard Cider, B) Standard
> >Perry, C) New England-Style Cider, D) Specialty Cider (other fruits or
> >adjuncts) and E) Specialty Perry?  Please provide websites and/or phone
> >numbers of the cider makers if you have them.
>........


>From: "Gary Awdey" <gawdey@att.net>
>Date: Tue, 23 Dec 2003 13:31:50 -0500
>..........I didn't mean to be snippy, but do want to point out the 
>absurdity of
>classifying cider as a type of beer.  Sure, in places like Ireland cider is
>a popular alternative to beer.  However, it's NOT the same.  ................


Terence Bradshaw
1189 Wheeler Road
Calais, VT 05648
madshaw@innevi.com
(802)229-2004


The views represented by me are mine and mine only................


------------------------------


End of Cider Digest #1102
*************************