Subject: Cider Digest #1549, 31 January 2010
From: cider-request@talisman.com




Cider Digest #1549                                         31 January 2010


                 Cider and Perry Discussion Forum


Contents:
  Water in Cider (Dennis.Marijan@gmail.com)
  RIP Terry Maloney (Ben Watson)
  Re: Cider Digest #1548, 18 January 2010 (Stephen Wood)
  Terry Maloney (Dick Dunn)


NOTE: Digest appears whenever there is enough material to send one.
Send ONLY articles for the digest to cider@talisman.com.
Use cider-request@talisman.com for subscribe/unsubscribe/admin requests.
Archives of the Digest are available at www.talisman.com/cider#Archives
Digest Janitor: Dick Dunn
----------------------------------------------------------------------


Subject: Water in Cider
From: Dennis.Marijan@gmail.com
Date: Tue, 19 Jan 2010 20:38:46 +0000


I have read that post fermentation water can be added for blending and
other practical purposes. I believe it was 10-15% without effective flavour
and still maintaining a True Cider status. Does anyone have experience with
this. How common is this practice? What happens if you add too much water
either by mistake or on purpose. What do you have to do to correct it? Does
this include addition of maltic acid (or citric) and something for
sweetness? I tried Lactose but found it soapy tasting?


Lastly, I was looking at taking the Cider Principles course out west in
Mount Vernon in June. Did anyone see or hear of anything in Eastern US
which I would prefer? I am trying to manage the expense of travel.


Dennis in Ontario


------------------------------


Subject: RIP Terry Maloney
From: Ben Watson <BWatson@chelseagreen.com>
Date: Sat, 30 Jan 2010 13:53:44 -0500


Dear Fellow Cider Digesters,


It is my sad duty to report the untimely death of one of the best-known and
best-loved of America's craft cidermakers -- Terry Maloney of West County
Cider in Colrain, Massachusetts.


Terry died in what can only be described as a freak accident yesterday
(Friday) in the basement cidermaking room at his home. From what I
understand, a piece of filtration equipment full of cider under pressure
"exploded" with sufficient force to knock Terry back, and he hit his head
hard, causing his death.


Already this morning (Sat), some of Terry's closest friends in the cider
community have been on the phone with one another, discussing this shocking
and unexpected event. In the course of time, I'm sure that we will organize
at least one memorial or tribute (and probably more) to this gentle,
affectionate man who -- as much as anyone -- was responsible (along with
his terrific wife Judith) for the modern rebirth of cider culture in the
US.


I first met Judith and Terry Maloney more than 20 years ago, and we almost
immediately became friends. The Maloneys came to western Massachusetts with
experience from California vineyards. The beautiful hill towns of Franklin
County, MA are a traditional apple-growing and cider-making region, so Terry
and Judith began a winery that focused on locally grown fruits like apples
and blueberries. Over the years, they have everything from unfiltered Farm
Cider (still one of my favorites) to artfully crafted cidre doux and a whole
range of distinguished varietals that included Reine de Pomme, Baldwin,
Roxbury Russet, Kingston Black, and the astonishingly good, copper-colored
Redfield, a signature product of West County Cider and an example of Terry's
skill as both a cidermaker and fruit grower.


In addition to making their own cider, Terry and Judith have been central
players in promoting craft ciders from all over the US -- as founders and
organizers of the annual Cider Days festival, which over the past 15+ years
has provided an ever-expanding showcase of the best American ciders. All of
us -- producers and drinkers alike -- owe the Maloneys our profound respect
and gratitude.


Those of us who knew Terry personally will always remember him as a
thoughtful, soft-spoken, cultured, but also passionate man, and will miss
him greatly. But Terry's death is also a loss to many in the cider world who
never met him -- he was a real pioneer who showed the way for so many of
today's craft producers. He willed be missed.


As I hear of any tributes or memorials being planned, I will try to pass
along that information to everyone.


Respectfully yours,


Ben Watson
Francestown, NH


------------------------------


Subject: Re: Cider Digest #1548, 18 January 2010
From: Stephen Wood <swood@farnumhillciders.com>
Date: Sat, 30 Jan 2010 13:39:35 -0500


A mighty man, a brilliant cidermaker, and my great friend has stepped away.
Terry Maloney left us on an unlucky moment, fiddling with a filter in his
cellar. How did that ever happen?  I'm faintly cheered to hope that he had
an instant for a wry chuckle at the way of his passing.  Anyway, here we all
are now, without him -- we've heard that gentle voice for the last time in
this world.  Please, each of you, fill a glass of the best cider you've ever
made, go outside, and lift it to the sky in gratitude for your great good
luck for having known him, or of him.


Steve Wood.


------------------------------


Subject: Terry Maloney
From: Dick Dunn <rcd@talisman.com>
Date: Sun, 31 Jan 2010 11:43:21 -0700


Shocked and saddened to hear of Terry's death.  Terry really was a key
figure in starting the renaissance of cider in the US--in promoting it,
helping other cidermakers, making fantastic cider, and generally setting
an example for the rest of us.  His thoughtful and never-unkind approach
to issues and concerns was particularly valuable to those of us who tend
to the dogmatic or temperamental side.


But that's enough eulogy from me; others can do far better.  What I've
been thinking since I got the bad news is:
What can we do to remember Terry?
Most obviously:  Carry on with what he was trying to do.


Plant cider trees.  Share scionwood.  Help the folks just starting orchards
to learn quickly.  We are connected to the land--something that the public
is starting to understand and appreciate.


Make good cider!  Share it and compare it.


And even if you're just a cider drinker, not growing or making it:  Seek
out good cider, tell friends about it.  Cider was an American tradition;
let's try to recover it.


Think about "local food" events and festivals, and how you might be part
of them to let people know about cider.
- -- 
Dick Dunn          rcd@talisman.com          Hygiene, Colorado  USA


------------------------------


End of Cider Digest #1549
*************************