From postmaster at longs.lance.colostate.edu Fri May 13 05:24:42 1994
Received: from longs.lance.colostate.edu by goodman.itn.med.umich.edu with SMTP id AA16642
  (5.65b/IDA-1.4.3 for spencer at hendrix.itn.med.umich.edu); Fri, 13 May 94 05:24:38 -0400
Received: from localhost (daemon at localhost) by longs.lance.colostate.edu (8.6.5/8.6.5a (LANCE 1.01)) id AAA03173 for reallambic at longs.lance.colostate.edu; Fri, 13 May 1994 00:30:07 -0600
Message-Id: <199405130630.AAA03173 at longs.lance.colostate.edu>
Reply-To: lambic at longs.lance.colostate.edu (postings only - do not send subscription requests here)
Errors-To: lambic-request at longs.lance.colostate.edu
Status: O
X-Status: 
From: lambic-request at longs.lance.colostate.edu (subscription requests only - do not post here)
To: lambic at longs.lance.colostate.edu
Subject: Lambic Digest #342 (May 13, 1994)
Date: Fri, 13 May 1994 00:30:07 -0600






Lambic Digest #342                             Fri 13 May 1994




        Forum on Lambic Beers (and other Belgian beer styles)
                Mike Sharp, Digest Coordinator




Contents:
  Re: Lambic Digest #341 (May 12, 1994) (Fliper)
  Incorrect tel. # for Microbrew Co. (STROUD)
  McEwan's yeast? (r.call)
  Microbrews of Belgium Number (Jim Liddil)
  Aging hops (Algis R Korzonas +1 708 979 8583)
  Mort Subite report (Aaron Birenboim)
  marriage parfait And the procession of St. Veronus (Jay Hersh)




Send article submissions only to: lambic at longs.lance.colostate.edu
Send all other administrative requests (subscribe/unsubscribe/change) to:
     lambic-request at longs.lance.colostate.edu
Back issues are available by mail; send empty message with subject 'HELP' to:
     netlib at longs.lance.colostate.edu


A FAQ is also available by netlib; say 'send faq from lambic' as the
subject or body of your message (to netlib at longs.lance.colostate.edu).


----------------------------------------------------------------------


Date: Thu, 12 May 1994 08:18:50 -0400
From: Fliper <pec at tmc.astm.cmri.cmu.edu>
Subject: Re: Lambic Digest #341 (May 12, 1994)




The number i got from 800 information was 1800 656 1212
when i called i found out they are online:
        vbdw at aol.com                   America online
        75070,1775 at compuserve.com  Compuserve


well, the names are correct... however you want to send them (i am not
sure if its aol.com, and compuserve.com or not)


here is their mail address:
Micro Brews of Belgium and France
52 pioneerr st.
Cooperstown, NY 13326


I must say, they are quite new.  I am not sure they have had much
phone orders, as they were shakey as to what to ask, and what not...
They do not seem very computer literate, but when i mentioned this
would go out over the internet, she promiced to check mail more often.
Overall they were very pleasent and nice to work with, i am getting
catalogs from them on glasware (not carboys, but pint glasses and the
like...)  They are also sending a beer catalog, but do not ship to PA
yet... darn.


enjoy and give them a call, or drop a line...


let them know you are online!


they may be interested in the mailing list as well....
who knows...




philip


Bibunt centum, bibunt mille!


------------------------------


Date: 12 May 1994 08:56:23 -0500 (EST)
From: STROUD%GAIA at leia.polaroid.com
Subject: Incorrect tel. # for Microbrew Co.


Please note that Mike listed the wrong number for the company
          Microbrews of Belgium and France.


The correct number is  1-800-973-2337
                               ~




I received a flyer from them a few weeks ago.  They sell the Vandenburg&DeWolf 
products by the case and will ship them to your doorstop.  The items currently 
listed included:


Duvel
Affligem dubbel & tripel
Saison Dupont
Boon (Gueuze, kriek, framboise, faro)
Rodenbach
Scaldis
Castleain
St. Amand
Jade
Boon 1986 Framboise Mariage Parfait ($110/case - 12 750 ml bottles + shipping)


I called about the Mariage Parfait, the only one of the above not available in
Beantown, and was told that they were out of it, weren't sure when they would
get more, and to try calling back at the end of June. 


Steve


------------------------------


Date: Thu, 12 May 94 14:12:00 UTC
From: r.call at genie.geis.com
Subject: McEwan's yeast?


I believe it was Mike Sharp who wrote a recipe and finished by saying he
pitched the batch with McEwan's yeast. Where do I get McEwan's yeast? Is it
the newer scotch yeast from wyeast? or your own personnal stash?
 Also, Can anybody help me to get to the yeast faq at stanford, I know the
address but I don't know who to send it too.(I keep getting it back saying
no recipient).
 Can anyone elaborate on the 3 belgian and one saison yeast from brewers
resource in Woodland Hills? What can expect from these yeasts?
 Apperciate all the help!    Ray Call - r.call at genie.geis.com


------------------------------


Date: Thu, 12 May 1994 8:01:37 -0700 (MST)
From: Jim Liddil <JLIDDIL at AZCC.Arizona.EDU>
Subject: Microbrews of Belgium Number


% 
% Mike Sharp wrote:
%         Microbrews of Belgium & France
%         1400 Mark St.
%         Elk Grove, IL 60007
%         1-800-974-2337


The number should have been 1-800-973-2337.


Jim


------------------------------


Date: 12 May 94 14:56:00 GMT
From: korz at iepubj.att.com (Algis R Korzonas +1 708 979 8583)
Subject: Aging hops


Jim writes (quoting a few others):
>% 0.040" is necessary, but this could just as well be the thickness of the
>% sheetmetal on my car...
>
>I have a MaltMill and used it for raw wheat.  I ran the grain through twice for
>the heck of it.  I blieve the spacing is 0.06


The current spacing on the latest models of MaltMills is 0.045.  It used to
be 0.055, but that was only to improve feeding.  The latest models with
the two diamond-knurl rollers feed like the dickens, so the 0.045 gap works.


>% > 2.  Is the statement about using 4 oz of aged hops in a 5 gal recipe in
>% >     the FAQ correct?  I have some old (1.5 yr) hops that I'm "aging" by
>% >     putting them in a zip-loc bag and filling it with 100% oxygen.  I
>% >     think this should accomplish the necessary oxidation of the alpha
>% >     acids.  What do you think of this method?
>% The hop levels presented in Guinard are very low IMHO.  (I assume thats
>% why the question came up.)  Figure 5-6 times the amount you would usually
>% use.
>
>I tend to agree about the low levels.  I used 6 ounces in my last 5 gallons.  I
>bought my hops a at natural foods store and they were already cheesy smelling. 
>I just left them in the Arizona sun for a few days.  I am doing the sma with
>pellets now from 1989.  Abag full of oxygen is just waiting for a flame to get
>near it if you know what I mean.


First off, oxygen doesn't burn, but it will fuel a fire and make it burn more
intensely.  However, the problem with filling a ziplock bag with oxygen is
that the bag is oxygen-permiable.  It is a similar problem as with trying to
keep hops fresh in an oxygen-permiable bag (the oxygen seeps IN).  I just
buy extra hops at the end of the year and store them in open bags.  I've got
perhaps 25 pounds of hops between 1 and 3 years old.  Make a offer to a local
homebrew supply store that you'll take their year-old hops off their hands
at a discount when the new crop comes in (starts around September usually).
On my first pLambiek, I used 3 ounces of 1.5-year-old Hallertauer whole hops
which I baked for 20 minutes in a 250F oven.  In retrospect, I could have
used twice as much.


Al.


------------------------------


Date: Thu, 12 May 1994 08:17:39 -0700
From: mole at netcom.com (Aaron Birenboim)
Subject: Mort Subite report


Last night i was privalaged enought to share a bottle of Mort Subite
hand caried here from belgium.  I could not find anyplace where Jackson
really reviewed this beer.  this is often a bad harbinger.  Well, it was
a geueze, and I'm glad to have had the opportunity to taste around a bit.


It was very subdued.  Slightly less sweet than i remember lindemans, but
less sour and complex, too, so the balance was mor toward sweet than
sour.  It had some brett nose, but a very clean, simple flavor and 
sourness.  A little lacking in complexity IMOHO.  I've seen Belle Vue
knocked around a lot over here, but I do seem to remember some
complexity to that one, which was lacking in Mort Subite.


It was geueze, so i will say emphaticly, that i did like it...
but franklly it will take up a position on the bottom of my geueze list.
I hope that John is not reading this, because I was nicer to the beer
in his presence, and I am extremely thankful for the experience.


           aaron


------------------------------


Date: Thu, 12 May 1994 12:28:12 EDT
From: Jay Hersh <hersh at x.org>
Subject: marriage parfait And the procession of St. Veronus




funny that Frank is worried about the bottle appearance.  He sure didn't worry
anything about the brewery appearance.  The place is a former iron foundry.
It looks like something from the movie Alien.  Dark, dusty with cobwebs
everywhere, pipe leaking steam, barrels piled everywhere and a wall full of
dusty bottles.  All in all very impressive :-)  :-) 


when we tried calling the brewery to arrange a visit (which we did several
times) there was no answer.  On  the Saturday before Easter we decided just 
to drive the Bruegel route (a challenge in itself) which took us to  Lembeek.  
Being there we decided to try to find the brewery (for future reference stand 
at the main entrance to the church with your back to the church, the brewery 
is on the lane directly in front of you a few hundred yards) and to ask Frank 
about the procession that Jackson mentions occurs on Easter Monday.


When we got to the brewery there were two small children out front.  We checked
the brewery office, no one there.  Went inside the brewery, no one visible.
Finally we rang at the house adjacent to the brewery and were lucky to find
Frank's wife who found Frank for us.  He said he was too busy to give us a
brewery tour, and spoke with us for a few minutes.  Finally we decided to go
and leave him to his business but asked if we could ask one last question.
so we asked about this procession on Monday.


Well this really got him going and I guess he decided he wasn't that busy after
all as he spent over 30 minutes telling us about this (more  info on that
later).  Finally he said we could just look around the brewery and he would go
back to working.  So we wandered about a little then went back to the car and
got some of the fabled Caution Lambic Brewer t-shirts Mike had made up for us
for use as thank you gifts to people who were nice to us. We also got out a
bottle of New England blueberry cider I had brought for similar purpose.


Upon heading back into the brewery to give this to Frank he decided he was a
little less busy than he thought :-)  this time he took us back to where the
casks were and opened up first a one year old, then a three year old gueze
for us to taste straight from the barrel.  It was quite a treat :-) 


while it might have been nice to have a formal tour, we basically got to see
all of what there was to see around the brewery.  It is probably one of the
least impressive breweries you will see from the standpoint of being visually
appealing.  However Frank is really quite a nice person and it was very good to
be able to meet him even if the Van Roy's over at Cantillion don't consider him
a "real" lambic brewer (I think they really only consider themselves as such :-) 






the procession of St. Veronus:


at about 8 or 8:30 on the morning of Easter Monday a procession leaves the town
of Lembeek for a 20 kilometer jaunt around the town.  In reality this is
actually several processions each with slightly different itineraries,  Leaving
from different points.  Originally the procession was a religious march.  It
was first done during the time of the black plague.  The church leaders wanted
to protect the town from the evil which was killing people (having no knowledge
of disease causes).  The manner they chose to do this was to take the relic of
St. Veronus (basically a relic of a Saint is the saints bones, well bones they
believe are the Saint's since you don't get to be a Saint until you are long
dead) which is kept in a very elaborate box called a reliquary, and march it
around the town limits.  St. Veronus is the patron Saint of the town of Lembeek.
Because the reliquary is silver, gold and jewel encrusted it needed to be
protected, so a procession of town people was assembled to join the march as a
guard.


The procession was done every year and subsequently became a tradition long
after the plague had ended.  The town evolved from being in a bend in the river
with a fortified wall and tower protecting it to a larger town surrounding this
fortification.  Eventually the fortified part in the bend in the river was
abandoned (the town moved outside the wall around 1640 ) and is now a nature
preserve.  The procession still marches around the original town limits.


In 1830 or so when Belgium became independent and a national army was formed
soldiers from Lembeek were given a holiday to join the procession.  As army
uniforms changed over the years old ones were made available to the town for
the town people to use in the procession.  Today there are several processions
which occur as part of the celebration.  Of course the religious procession
still occurs and follows the original route.  Other processions choose a route
based upon the location of bars and restaurants conveniently located along the
approximate original route.  Thus the procession has for most people become an
all day party, with a pre-arranged lunch stop and much drinking.  The
procession returns to town around 5 or 5:30 in the afternoon.




A side note on patron saints:


if you go into the church in Lembeek notice the pillars and the signs hung from
them.  The sign posts are in the shape of dragons.  This is not a traditional
religious design.  It reflects the brewing history of the town.  Previously a
brewery named Brasserie du Dragon was located there in the late 19th century.
The brewery donated these signs to the church.  The brewery took its name from
the legend of St. George who killed the Dragon.  St. George was considered a
patron Saint of the lambic brewers while St. Veronus was a patron Saint of the
town itself.  If you go to the Cantillion brewery you may notice in the posters
on the wall old brewing labels which have a dragon in them. also there is a
picture of JP Van Roy  with George Schulz, former secretary of state, standing
in front of a Cantillion logo with a dragon on it.  This symbol was used by
many lambic brewers into the early part of this century.






All this is of course via Frank Boon, so any embellishments or misinformation
comes from him and not me.




        JaH


------------------------------




End of Lambic Digest
************************
-------