From: cider-request@talisman.com
Errors-To: cider-errors@talisman.com
Reply-To: cider@talisman.com
To: cider-list@talisman.com
Subject: Cider Digest #997, 7 October 2002




Cider Digest #997                                         7 October 2002


                 Forum for Discussion of Cider Issues
                      Dick Dunn, Digest Janitor


Contents:
  applejack caveats ("Benjamin Watson")
  Foaming Cider at bottling ()
  CiderDay (Terry Maloney)


Send ONLY articles for the digest to cider@talisman.com.
Use cider-request@talisman.com for subscribe/unsubscribe/admin requests.
    When subscribing, please include your name and a good address in the
    message body unless you're sure your mailer generates them.
Archives of the Digest are available at www.talisman.com/cider
----------------------------------------------------------------------


Subject: applejack caveats
From: "Benjamin Watson" <bwatson@monad.net>
Date: Wed, 02 Oct 2002 11:27:25 -0400


Far be it from me to rain on anyone's parade, but I wanted to weigh in with
some caveats concerning applejack (an aperitif that used to be called "cider
oil" in the old days). There's been a lot of recent discussion about
concentrating cider by means of fractional crystallization (which is a
20-cent way of saying "freezing"). This will produce applejack -- I've done
this myself a couple of winters ago, as an experiment, and a rule of thumb
is that you will probably get about an imperial pint (22 oz. or a bit more)
from the gallon of hard cider that you start with, before freezing.


The alcohol content will vary based on how low the temperature dips during
the freezing and thawing period. I made mine during a period in late January
with temperatures dipping to around 0 deg. F. Based on a chart in Sanborn
Brown's book, Wines & Beers of Old New England, that temperature would
result in an applejack with a strength of around 14% abv -- about the level
of a light aperitif. Brown's information suggests that at -30 deg. F you
could make a really kickass applejack, around 65 proof (32.5% abv).


Having both made and consumed a small amount of applejack, I feel that it's
important to caution would be 'jackmakers about the nature of the stuff. It
is very rough, because you are essentially doing the exact opposite of what
you would be doing in traditional heat distillation. In the latter case, you
are purifying the alcohol, and saving only the best stuff -- not even the
impure "heads" and "tails" from the beginning and end of the run, which
contain the "fractions" that (in very small amounts) lend flavor and
character to distilled spirits.


The problem is, when you're using the freezing method, you are concentrating
not only the alcohol, but also these impurities. Drinking too much of this
impure alcohol can give you a wicked headache; and even half a wineglass was
enough to give me a mild case of what used to be known as "apple palsy": my
leg started involuntarily twitching. It's amusing stuff, in small
quantities.


Applejack is lovely stuff in the bottle -- medium amber in color -- but it
does benefit from aging, and it is quite dry. I added a bit of sugar to mine
at bottling, and also had to filter it a couple of times to eliminate some
"floaties" and sediment that were thrown off during initial bottle
conditioning. The 'jack I made 3 years ago is probably perfect for drinking
now.


So, by all means, experiment with making applejack if you live in an area
with really cold winters. Freezing alone at 0 deg. or below doesn't do much
good in my experience -- the point is that you need bone-chillingly cold
nights and clear, relatively mild days to produce really good stuff. But be
advised that drinking this traditional beverage is something best done in
strict moderation, unless you really want to develop a case of delirium
tremens or a massive morning-after head. And, oh, by the way, it IS illegal
to make the stuff, though it's doubtful that ATF agents will come looking
for you, unless you're insanely indiscreet.


For more information on the subject, I recommend my own book (Cider, Hard
and Sweet) or the Sanborn Brown book, published by Univ. Press of New
England and still in print.


Ben Watson 


------------------------------


Subject: Foaming Cider at bottling
From: <excite@politas.mailshell.com>
Date: Sat, 05 Oct 2002 05:12:30 -0700


I'm a bit worried about my latest batch of 
cider.  I had a bit of an accident when it was
fermenting and knocked over the carboy. obviously 
this lead to some air getting in and the cider
got severly shaken up.  Fermentation had been 
pretty slow before then (mostly due to low
temperature, I think), and after the drop, it 
bubbled away quite happily and seemed to have
"woken up".


the sg stabilised over the last week and a half, 
so I bottled it last night.  This was when it
got odd.  While filling the bottles, using the 
usual bottle filler tap and pipe combo thingie,
the cider was foaming like beer, which I have 
never had happen before.  I had to fill each
bottle in a two-step process, or else lose half 
my cider in foam.  


Does anyone have any idea what this means for 
the future of this batch of cider?  Is it worth
keeping?  Should I perhaps cellar it somewhere 
safe, in case of glass grenades?  


If this is the result of an infection, does that 
mean the cider will be undrinkable?  Does it
actually become harmful to drink (moreso than 
any alcoholic beverage, that is), or does it just
taste bad?


------------------------------


Subject: CiderDay
From: Terry Maloney <terry@westcountycider.com>
Date: Mon, 07 Oct 2002 11:36:59 -0400


The Eighth Annual Franklin County CiderDay takes place November 2 & 3rd
this year in Western Massachusetts.  Orchards and Cidermills will have
special blends to make hard cider.   Restaurants will be serving apple
and cider based food.  The home cidermaker can learn how to make cider
on Saturday, and on Sunday discuss and taste with other cidermakers
(Workshop's title: Bad Cider!) where his last year's cider went wrong .
The  orchardist can listen to Jon Clements, U Mass Tree Fruit
Specialist, discuss the home orchard and then watch him prune some
challenging trees.  Ben Watson, author of  'Cider: Hard and Sweet' will
lead an informal tasting of ciders from both coasts,  with east and west
coast  cidermakers adding their comments.  There will be cooking
demonstrations at the Green Emporium .  The Meetinghouse Marketplace
will have local farms and artisans with their products as well as
Hillside Farm Heirloom Apples offering their 100+ varieties for tasting
and purchase (you can also ask Lou to identify that apple you have been
wondering about.).  For families with young children,  New Salem
Preserves and Orchard will have their child friendly press going both
days and the Deerfield Inn will have their Apple Festival on Sunday. The
trolley that used to ply between Colrain and Shelburne Falls will be
ready to ride at the Trolley Museum in Shelburne Falls.


For shedules, maps and information go to http://www.ciderday.org


------------------------------


End of Cider Digest #997
*************************