Subject: Mead Lover's Digest #819, 24 August 2000
From: mead-request@talisman.com


Mead Lover's Digest #819                                  24 August 2000

            Forum for Discussion of Mead Making and Consuming
                      Dick Dunn, Digest Janitor

Contents:
  ROCKS? ("Scholz, Richard")
  dissolving quartz!? (Shroom)
  Re: Home version / Cats-meow ("Matt Maples")
  Aging in new oak ("Sebastian Padilla")
  Crystals in mead ("Roger Flanders")
  Re:Crystals ("Matt Maples")
  Royal Jelly, inverted carboys and mead ("Linda Grant/Matthew Ransom")
  Re: TEJ (Dan McFeeley)
  Beets your mead (JazzboBob@aol.com)
  Re: Mead Lover's Digest #818, 22 August 2000 (Brian and Andi Shannon)
  Re: Mead newbee (Brian and Andi Shannon)
  re: Herbal/Medicinal Meads (Dick Dunn)
  Organic Honey (TPArmantrout@aol.com)
  Braggot (BillPierce@aol.com)
  Crystals (Elfboy0@aol.com)
  Bentonite vs. diatomaceous earth (Sparkolloid) ("Grant Knechtel")
  NYC area honey for mead ("Todd D. Hardie")
  Re: Herbal/Medicinal Meads (dworkin@village.org)

NOTE: Digest appears when there is enough material to send one.
Send ONLY articles for the digest to mead@talisman.com.
Use mead-request@talisman.com for [un]subscribe/admin requests.
Digest archives and FAQ are available at www.talisman.com/mead.  There is
a searchable MLD archive at hubris.engin.umich.edu/Beer/Threads/Mead
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Subject:  ROCKS?
From: "Scholz, Richard" <RScholz@refco.com>
Date: Tue, 22 Aug 2000 13:17:14 -0400

Dick Dunn writes in MLD #818
>
Even that begs the question of *why* you would want to put rocks in your
mead.
>
Joshua writes in MLD #818
>
If you are at all consciously sensitive to energy, I'd highly recommend
trying it at least once. A couple of points of caution. The crystal will
need recuperation time afterwards, so don't drop it into another batch right
after using it. Also, some crystals do *not* like having this done. I used
an amethyst crystal in this way once, without really asking it first. Upon
removing it, it was the first time I've ever had a crystal yell at me.
(Whether this is a property of amethyst in general, or the personality of
the crystal, I don't know). If you can't talk with crystals, state your
intention for the crystal with the crystal in your left hand, and try and
get a "feeling" of whether or not it's okay?
>
And I respond:
Dick, you and I must not be "consciously sensitive to (the) energy" of our
rocks as Joshua is. We just must be luddites when it comes to detecting
"energies" not reproducibly detectable by any know physical method. (Feeling
it in your "heart" won't cut it for us modern physicists)  And remember to
hold it in your LEFT hand! ;^) What would happen if I talked to my rocks
while holding them in my Right hand? ;^)
I have made a few meads over the years, and added fruit, spices and extracts
but I never even contemplated adding minerals to my meads. I leave that to
the New York City water supply. 

Later,
- -----------------------------------
Richard L Scholz
Brooklyn,  NY

------------------------------

Subject: dissolving quartz!?
From: Shroom <shroom@theriver.com>
Date: Tue, 22 Aug 2000 11:29:57 -0700

>  anything like that with any success.  I also read somewhere about putting
>  semi-precious stones (ie quartz) in during fermentation, which were
>  subsequently dissolved.  Interesting?!  Input greatly appreciated.

Quartz, in its simplest form, is silicon dioxide (SiO2) - this is clear
or white, and is one of the most common minerals on earth (sand, a large
component of granite, etc).  All kinds of semiprecious stones are formed
from this base:  Carnelian, aventurine, amethyst, citrine, rose quartz
are all simple silicates with minor impurities (metals, such as iron,
copper, etc).

>From there, you get into complex silicates, such as beryl (such as
aquamarine), tourmaline, topaz, ruby (corundum), sapphire, etc.  These
also have the basic SiO2 core, but hang other molecules around them.

All of the above minerals will dissolve in the proper solution, but I'd
really recommend that you NOT drink it (depending on the mineral, you
may have to use sulfuric, nitric, or hydrofluoric acid of high strength)

Those minerals that do dissolve in your brew are probably worse for
you.  Usual suspects include carbonates (ranging from calcite - calcium
carbonate, perfectly harmless, to malachite - copper carbonate
hydroxide, which is toxic) or sulfates (bornite - copper iron sulfate).

 The trouble is that even the "safe" minerals like calcite can contain
unacceptable amounts of free iron, magnesium, manganese, zinc, or even
cobalt (bright pink cobaltocalcite is a really nice looking mineral, but
don't go chewing on it!) So even if you were to put something in the
brew, it won't help the flavor. It can only hurt (you).


Good reference: www.minerals.net



Fred Bourdelier
Tucson AZ

(lurk mode on)

------------------------------

Subject: Re: Home version / Cats-meow
From: "Matt Maples" <matt_lists@hotmail.com>
Date: Tue, 22 Aug 2000 12:34:16 -0700

>I am would like to know if there is any interest in a home version
>of the searchable archive.

If the good web version was not available I certainly would be. I know it
was down, but only for a short time and accidents do happen. I personally
feel that you would be unnecessarily duplicating the efforts of Mister
Spencer. If you end up doing it anyway I would very much like to see it and
play with it but I probably would not take the time to keep it updated with
all of the latest posts as Spencer web version does seem to do a great job.

If anyone would like a programming project related to MLD I think someone
should pick-up on the now defunked Cats Meow. It hasn't been updated in
years and I seem to remember the web site stating that it got to be too much
to maintain. Probably due to the explosion of posts that had been hitting
HBD. I know there are places where you can post your recipes but I think it
would better if someone pulled them out of MLD and kept a nice index.  I
mean I am happy to post recipes to MLD but don't really feel the desire to
post them again to a recipe repository (call me lazy). I'm not really a
programmer but I'm sure there is a way to at least semi automate that kind
of process as recipes are usually typed out in a fairly predictable format.
Just an idea.

Matt Maples
Anagram: "Tap Me Malts!"


May mead regain its rightful place as the beverage of gods and kings

------------------------------

Subject: Aging in new oak
From: "Sebastian Padilla" <sebastianpadilla@hotmail.com>
Date: Tue, 22 Aug 2000 19:36:56 GMT

I am seriously considering aging a mead in a new american oak barrel.  I 
would like to get some feed back on any suggested procedures on how to do 
this.  Here are some of the specifics: The mead is a mixture of citrus and 
wild flower honeys with some acid blend, tannin, and yeast energizer added.  
The mead had an original gravity of 1.112, and as of last reading the 
gravity is at 1.000.  It is just about crystal clear after 7 months of 
aging/fermenting.  The Oak barrel is 5 gallons and is brand spankin new 
american oak, with no toasting.

Ok now for my questions.  Should I do any sort of pre-treatment to blunt the 
flavor of the oak or is it ok to just age for a shorter time?  How long 
should I let the mead stay in the oak for it to pick up a good amount of oak 
flavor given the above specifics?  How many batches of mead will I have to 
do before I can do the bulk of my secondary aging in oak (ie leave it in the 
oak for months on end without ending up with oak juice)?  Also please feel 
free to add any other info you would feel is helpful in the use of oak 
barrels.

Private email is fine, though this might be of interest to the masses.
Thank you in advance for your help.

Sebastian Padilla
Tucson, AZ

------------------------------

Subject: Crystals in mead
From: "Roger Flanders" <flanders@probe.net>
Date: Tue, 22 Aug 2000 14:48:45 -0500

(Joshua/Elfboy writes: "...state your intention for the crystal with the
crystal in your left hand, and try and get a "feeling" of whether or not it's
okay.")
Just to be safe, I'd check first on the origin of the rock.  In many
parts of the world, sir, the left hand is considered unclean.  This
vehemently-enforced cultural taboo may be compared to mention of
sucking siphons in letters to MLD.

------------------------------

Subject: Re:Crystals
From: "Matt Maples" <matt_lists@hotmail.com>
Date: Tue, 22 Aug 2000 13:01:42 -0700

Josh,

I'm with Dick in that some good care does need to be taken with adding
crystals to your mead. I am not really sensitive to such things but as I am
getting older I am more open to non scientific ideas (I detest the term "New
Age") BUT knowing a little chemistry of the rocks would be prudent. You seem
to be a fellow that does his research and as I know you wouldn't use herbs
without at least reading up on them so to with the crystals. Good vibes from
the crystals is one thing, lead poisoning is another. I'm sure you are
already doing this but I just want you to be safe.

Matt Maples
Anagram: "Tap Me Malts!"


May mead regain its rightful place as the beverage of gods and kings

------------------------------

Subject: Royal Jelly, inverted carboys and mead
From: "Linda Grant/Matthew Ransom" <spiritflight@kachina.net>
Date: Tue, 22 Aug 2000 17:24:04 -0700

Hey brewers!

I'm new to making mead and was wondering if royal jelly is good to add to
mead. The substance is produced by the young worker bees and is fed to the
larva from which the queen bee develops and eats through her eight year life
span (the workers get none and die in two to six months). Royal Jelly
contains proteins, several types of natural sugars, unsaturated fats,
enzymes, high levels of pantothenic acid, nucleic acid and vitamin B-6. The
British royal family uses it for health and longevity. Most health food
stores carry is in raw form.

Also, I like the idea of inverted carboys. Seems like it works better than
racking for removing the lees and such. What say you, brewers?

Matthew Ransom
spiritflight@kachina.net

------------------------------

Subject: Re: TEJ
From: Dan McFeeley <mcfeeley@keynet.net>
Date: Wed, 23 Aug 2000 11:03:47 -0500

On Tue, 01 Aug 2000, in MLD 815, Aaron Perry wrote:

>Any one out there ever made Tej? I've been looking around but haven't
>turned up much info about it. So far all I know is it's an Ethiopian
>mead. Does it differ from other meads? If so how? I'd like to make 
>some as my next batch.....but then I have a freezer full of prickly
>pears too........so many ideas! 

T'ej is the national drink of Ethiopia, generally made in the home for
family consumption and having a tradition supposedly going back to at
least the 4th Century.  It's quite unique and nearly impossible to exactly
duplicate here in the states.  T'ej recipes vary from family to family,
but the basic style comes from the use of a bitter extract from a native
Ethiopian tree, the Gesho.  The mead is an ideal pairing with the cuisine
of Ethopia, which is spicy hot and served communal style with thin rounds
of Injera bread.  

About 15 years ago, a group of Ethiopian nationals living near Washington
DC contacted Anthony Aellen of Berrywine Plantation in Mt. Airy Maryland
and asked if he could duplicate the T'ej they remembered from their 
homeland.  It took some effort, but he was able to come up with a passable
duplicate.  If they're still making T'ej, you can contact them at:

        Berrywine Plantation               
        Lucille Aellen                          
        Linganore Winecellars          
        13601 Glissens Mill Rd         
        Mt. Airy,  MD  21771-8595       
        (310) 831-5889         
        (410) 795-6432
        www.linganore-wine.com
        info@linanore-wine.com

Here is a recipe for Ethiopian T'ej from _The Meadmakers Journal_, Fall 1988.
I can't vouch for its authenticity -- you'll have to try it for yourself!


   Utensils needed:  Medium cooking pot
                     3 gallon barrel or glass container
                  
   Ingredients:      32 oz. honey
                     1 gallon water
                     1 1/2 cups woody hops

   Mix water and honey in 3 gallon container.  Set aside in a warm room.
   After 3 days, put 6 cups of honey water in the medium cooking pot.  
   Bring to a boil and simmer over low heat for 15 minutes after adding 
   woody hops.  Set aside to cool.  Add mixture to 3 gallon container.
   Let stand for 5 days.  Remove hops using strainer.  Cover container
   for 15 to 20 days.  Store in cool location or put in bottles and
   refrigerate after filtering.  Serves 6 to 12.

   Variations of the recipe can call for: 

   Medium citron     -- peeled, sliced, seedless
   coffee beans      -- roasted, cooled and ground
   orange peels      -- 4 medium
   prunes            -- 3 pounds ripe
   banans            -- 6 medium

   The additional ingredients are added after the hops are removed and 
   before storing in the covered container for 15 to 20 days.

               "Traditional Ethiopian T'ej," by Virginia Davis
               _The Meadmakers Journal_ Fall 1988 p. 5.


A couple of notes -- Davis suggested that yeast may have been introduced
by wild yeasts or other means, but that meadmakers should use a commercial
yeast.  The article gave no details on hop type, only described it
as above, a "woody hop."  Brewers on this list may have a better idea
of what type of hop would work in this recipe.  

However you obtain your T'ej, either through Berrywine or your own efforts,
try serving it with an Ethiopian style meal.  Jeff Smith's _The Frugal
Gourmet On Our Immigrant Ancestors_ (William Morrow and Company, Inc.,
New York, 1990.  ISBN 0-688-07590-8) has a section on Ethiopian cuisine.


<><><><><><><><><><>
<><><><><><><><>
Dan McFeeley
mcfeeley@keynet.net

------------------------------

Subject:  Beets your mead
From: JazzboBob@aol.com
Date: Wed, 23 Aug 2000 12:21:43 EDT

   Subject:  Beet Mead
   
   I once made a Borscht Mead using beets and carrots with wildflower honey.  
  I'm writing while away from home so I don't have the exact recipe.  
However, 
  I recall using around 5# of beets, 5# carrots, 12# honey to make a 5 gallon 
  batch.  It had a pink color with a thick and chewy texture.  It had a 
  somewhat sweet taste perhaps from the beets, and an unusual earthy taste in 
  the finish.  I remember the color faded with time and the taste became 
bland 
  as it aged.  It lost the curious and unique tasting finish too.  It was at 
  it's best when young.  It was an early experiment of mine that I made 
around 
  10 years ago and I've always wanted to try it again.  I'd say go for it if 
  you have a bountiful supply of beets.  
   Cheers,  Bob Grossman
     

------------------------------

Subject: Re: Mead Lover's Digest #818, 22 August 2000
From: Brian and Andi Shannon <kysoti13@fidalgo.net>
Date: Wed, 23 Aug 2000 10:01:14 -0700



>(Need more carboys...)
Is there someone this doesn't apply to?

Keep your stick on the ice!

------------------------------

Subject: Re: Mead newbee
From: Brian and Andi Shannon <kysoti13@fidalgo.net>
Date: Wed, 23 Aug 2000 10:01:12 -0700


>I have yet to make a batch of mead, but I am planning one to be started
>shortly. I am looking for any tips or suggestions from you experienced
>mead makers. I am thinking of making a 5 gallon batch and splitting it
>into two different types in 2 1/2 gallon batches, one citrus and the
>other I am not sure of yet (any suggestions?). 
>
Great! Why not do half as straight mead with no additional flavors? As 
much as everyone goes on here about adding different flavorings, there is 
nothing that matches the taste of pure, unaltered mead!  (btw, I have 4 
fruit batches bubbling away now :-)  )

Brian

Keep your stick on the ice!

------------------------------

Subject: re: Herbal/Medicinal Meads
From: rcd@raven.talisman.com (Dick Dunn)
Date: 23 Aug 00 11:19:54 MDT (Wed)

regarding [quartz] crystals and mead...
> I've placed a crystal in with the fermentation several times. The vibrational 
> properties of the crystal were imparted onto the mead, providing a sort of 
> "clear drunk" (how's that for an oxymoron?) experience...

Wheeeeeee!
I didn't realize we were headed down this path.
On the reality side of things, it _is_ possible to produce meads which are
more or less befuddling, and particularly, more or less prone to creating
hangovers.  But that is done by control over the higher alcohols produced
during fermentation, _not_ by some mystical "vibrational properties".  (Oh
yeah, and "higher" alcohols refers to higher molecular weight, not alcohols
from the astral plane.)

>...If you are at all consciously sensitive to energy...

wuffa wuffa!
I believe that anyone who can see, hear, feel temperature,... is
"consciously sensitive to energy".

> ...A couple of points of caution. The crystal will need recuperation time 
> afterwards, so don't drop it into another batch right after using it. Also, 
> some crystals do *not* like having this done...

woop! woop! woop! woop! woop!
Most likely is that the crystal is unaffected by the mead (and vice-versa),
as would be the case with quartz.  There is no "recuperation time".  The
other possibility is that the mead would dissolve something out of the
crystal, in which case it's changed and it's not going to change back.

By the way, folks, crystals are inanimate objects, so they do not "like" or
"dislike".  The particularly ordered molecular structure of a crystal may
give it some useful properties, but they are not possessed of, or by, any
vibrational magic, awareness, or active abilities.  Crystals are basically
pretty rocks.

>...I used an amethyst crystal in 
> this way once, without really asking it first. Upon removing it, it was the 
> first time I've ever had a crystal yell at me.

If you are talking to rocks, be sure you have a valid, current poetic
license.

If you are asking questions of rocks and expecting them to answer you, or
if rocks are yelling at you, you shouldn't have had that last few glasses
of mead.  If you weren't drinking when this happened, you may be delusion-
al--a condition that can be dangerous to yourself or those around you.

The art and craft of meadmaking is an ancient one; as such it carries
lore, mythology, and superstition with it.  I think we ought to be able to
accept and remember those aspects for what they are--no more, no less.  I
also think we ought to be able to use the gift of our own time--which is
enough science to understand what really goes on in mead and to learn to
make good mead reliably.  It would be a shame if our our generation's
"contribution" to meadmaking included a bunch of New-Age bogosities.

>...If you 
> can't talk with crystals, state your intention for the crystal with the 
> crystal in your left hand, and try and get a "feeling" of whether or not it's 
> okay.

What if I'm left-handed?  What if the crystal is left-handed (e.g., levro-
rotatory)?  What if I'm in touch with reality and holding a crystal in my
left hand produces nothing more than the sensation of holding a pretty rock?
- ---
Dick Dunn          rcd@talisman.com          Hygiene, Colorado  USA
   ...Simpler is better.

------------------------------

Subject: Organic Honey
From: TPArmantrout@aol.com
Date: Wed, 23 Aug 2000 14:54:16 EDT

Can anyone tell me if any of the pesticides used in beekeeping filter into
the honey?  Is there really such a thing as organic honey?  

Does anyone know of a source of honey that is largely away from
commercially grown agricultural crops?  Is this even possible?

Thanks, Tim

------------------------------

Subject: Braggot
From: BillPierce@aol.com
Date: Wed, 23 Aug 2000 17:49:38 EDT

You can tell that my roots are more in brewing than in meadmaking, but I 
wanted an opinion from any meadmakers who have experience with braggot.

I just opened the first bottle of a batch of braggot that I brewed back on 
the last day of February. It's the first time I've ever tasted this style.

The recipe was quite simple (for 5.5 gallons): a grain bill of 4.5 lbs. 
two-row malt, a pound of CaraPils and half a pound of Caramalt (10 L). I did 
a single infusion mash with a 90 minute conversion at 155 F. After sparging, 
the runoff was boiled for 75 minutes, with a single hop addition of 1 oz. 
Hallertau pellets for 60 minutes. At flameout I added 6 lbs. of clover honey, 
chilled the wort and pitched a starter of Wyeast 1318. The O.G. was 1.061. 
The color is light (3.9 SRM) and so is the bittering (10.5 IBUs).

Fermentation was 18 days in primary at 62 F (it fermented rather slowly) and 
90 days in secondary at 64 F. It never cleared as much as I would have liked, 
so I fined it with Sparkolloid and bottled. The final gravity was 1.008. I 
used 180 grams (6.3 oz. by weight) of corn sugar to prime.

The result is somewhat interesting. The color is a pale gold and it is quite 
clear. The head is medium and relatively long lasting. The aroma is what I 
would expect from Wyeast 1318--slightly fruity with some faint yeastiness. 
The hop aroma is barely discernible and there is no maltiness.

As for flavor, it is very mild, with just a slight honey character and some 
soft fruitiness. There is just enough bitterning to tell that it is hopped, 
but no more than that. The body is somewhere between light and medium; the 
CaraPils does a good job of balancing the honey. Carbonation is about 2.5 
volumes of CO2. And there is a touch of alcoholic warmth, as would be 
expected from something that is almost 7 percent ABV.

Overall, it's quite clean, with no off flavors to speak of. But it's also a 
little boring. By no means is it thin, but there's not much richness in the 
flavor. I suspect it will be a refreshing summer drink, which is why I intend 
to serve it while the weather remains warm.

With 50 percent of the fermentables from malt and 50 percent from honey, I 
wondered if my braggot would be more like beer or mead. I have to say that it 
comes down more on the beer side of the equation, something like a light (in 
color, aroma and flavor more than in body and alcohol), slightly fruity ale 
with faint honey notes.

Would anyone else with experience with braggot care to comment?

- -- Bill Pierce
Cellar Door Homebrewery
Des Moines, IA

------------------------------

Subject: Crystals
From: Elfboy0@aol.com
Date: Thu, 24 Aug 2000 11:25:22 EDT

For those interested in use of crystals, whether particularly in mead or in 
general, I recommend the book "Love Is In The Earth: A Kaleidoscope of 
Crystals" by Melody. Most stores that focus on the sale of crystals will have 
this book, and metaphysical bookstores are likely to have it. It contains a 
section discussing the preparation of elixirs (i.e., "[putting] rocks in your 
mead", or other liquids), including a bit of safety and an alternative 
preparation method for potentially toxic situations. The bulk of the 720+ 
page book, of course, discusses the various metaphysical properties of what 
seems to be every known crystal. While I have not read through every single 
entry, I have noted that some entries specify when there are risks invovled 
when making an elixir with that crystal. I do not recall if there are 
differences listed based on water or alcohol - my assumption is there aren't 
(which I realize limits the usefulness in the context of mead, unless you use 
the alternate method of preparation she gives). Each entry does detail the 
chemical composition and formation, so a knowledge of chemsitry can be 
applied in determining safety.

Of course, when it comes to energy and metaphysical occurances, there are 
rarely absolutes. No book should serve as anything more than a guide, and 
this book is no exception. Always (in the *almost* absolute sense  :) look to 
your own intuition to see if it agrees with, or wants to modify, what a book 
is saying. I know a few people that don't agree with Melody's assessments of 
crystals' properties, but I feel it's a good place to start, and as I said, 
she seems to address potential toxicity.

                                        -   Joshua

------------------------------

Subject: Bentonite vs. diatomaceous earth (Sparkolloid)
From: "Grant Knechtel" <GWK@hartcrowser.com>
Date: Thu, 24 Aug 2000 09:33:22 -0700

Dworkin says in part, in MLD 818 re sparkolloid,

>By which I infer it is similar to, if not the same as, bentonite.

Have never used Sparkolloid, but bentonite is a clay and
diatomaceous earth is opaline silica. Sparkolloid is a
polysaccharide which uses diatomaceous earth as carrier. 

Dry bentonite has a huge affinity for water to hydrate the clay
while diatomaceous earth does not.  Bentonite has a net
negative charge while Sparkolloid has a net positive charge. 
This means they will strip particles with opposite charges from
the mead, beer or wine being fined.  Bottom line: use them for
differing tasks.

>Here's the step I always have problems with (at least with bentonite).
>I get some small percentage of the total suspended, but most of it is
>tied up into big globs.  Same problem you'll see with, say, adding
>water to flour in imprudent amounts.  Any suggestions?

What i have done successfully is using a wire whisk, add small amounts
bentonite to water, whisking in each bit before adding more, much as
one would do adding flour to liquid.   When all the bentonite is added,
boil.  When the boiling slurry gets too thick add more water.  When
bentonite is well boiled and at pourable consistency, add to carboy. 
Cool first.

My $.02, and Wassail!
- -LabRat

------------------------------

Subject: NYC area honey for mead
From: "Todd D. Hardie" <todd@honeygardens.com>
Date: Thu, 24 Aug 2000 15:54:34 -0700

Saw the note in the Digest #818. We work with honey bees in the
Champlain Valley of Vermont and St. Lawrence River Valley of northern
New York and offer our bees' honey in larger sizes for making mead:

Information is available on the web site, linked below; we ship
honey in larger containers:
    in a 60 lb. bucket - $64 + $14 shipping, insurance
    6 x 5 lb. jars, 30 lb. total - $50 + $8 shipping, insurance

These shipping rates are for the northeast, and for beyond additional
charges apply, per zone. We offer raw Apitherapy honey and lightly
heated honey.

Todd D. Hardie

Honey Gardens Apiaries, Inc.
641 Richmond Road
Hinesburg, VT 05461

tel.800-416-2083

e-mail = todd@honeygardens.com

www.honeygardens.com

------------------------------

Subject: Re: Herbal/Medicinal Meads
From: dworkin@village.org
Date: Thu, 24 Aug 2000 21:21:29 -0600


rcd@raven.talisman.com (Dick Dunn) wrote:
:  
:  TPArmantrout@aol.com wrote:
:  
:  > ...I also read somewhere about putting 
:  > semi-precious stones (ie quartz) in during fermentation, which were 
:  > subsequently dissolved...
:  
:  [...]
:  As for other semi-precious stones, for most of them it is about equally
:  unlikely that mead would dissolve them, but before you do this, think
:  carefully about what minerals might be present, that the acid of the mead
:  might leach out, and that might be harmful.  Semi-precious stones are not
:  in general intended to be "food grade".
:  
:  Even that begs the question of *why* you would want to put rocks in your
:  mead.

For the various properties ascribed to the various kinds of stones, of
course.  In the Middle Ages (and no doubt previous and subsequent
times), just about every kind of stone and mineral had some sort of
special property associated with it.  A recent issue of the SCA's
Compleat Anachronist was a write-up of exactly what properties went
with which stones (I'm pretty sure it was in the last year).  So, you
might try contacting the SCA's stock clerk (start at www.sca.org) to
get the relevant back issue.

Now, one thing that is stated quite clearly in that pamphlet is that,
despite all the neat and wonderful things ascribed to those stones, in
practice, most are actually poisonous or effectively inert.  So,
although there's a lot of interesting historical bits to go look at,
there's little practical application to go along.

        Dworkin

------------------------------

End of Mead Lover's Digest #819
*******************************
