

Mead Lover's Digest #36                     Sun 15 November 1992


        Forum for Discussion of Mead Brewing and Consuming
               John Dilley, Digest Coordinator


Contents:
  Mead-Lover's Digest README / FAQ (John Dilley)


Send articles for submission to the digest to mead-lovers@nsa.hp.com
Send digest addition or removal requests to mead-lovers-request@nsa.hp.com

----------------------------------------------------------------------

Date: Tue Nov 10 16:52:37 1992
From: John Dilley <jad@nsa.hp.com>
Subject: Mead-Lover's Digest README / FAQ

        This is a special issue of the mead-lovers digest.  There were
no articles submitted today, so instead this README/FAQ is going out.  I
hope you find it useful and informative.  Please feel free to contribute
information to it if you have some to share.  Send it to the request
address, mead-lovers-request@nsa.hp.com, so it gets in the master copy
of this file.  Thank you, enjoy -- and of course, Wassail!

                         --       jad       --

Subject:        Mead-Lovers README file
Contributed-by: Thomas Manteufel  and  John Dilley
With-Thanks-To: Michael Tighe
Version:        $Revision: 1.6 $  $Date: 92/11/10 16:55:45 $

    This document is a list of basic information about mead and mead making
    for the beginner.  It is intended to get you started and answer your
    initial questions about mead and mead making.  Please feel free to post
    any questions you have after reading this document to the mead-lovers
    digest mailing list, mead-lovers@nsa.hp.com.  If you would like to
    subscribe or unsubscribe send mail to mead-lovers-request@nsa.hp.com.


The History and Tradition of Mead

    Mead is a honey based fermented beverage that has been produced and
    enjoyed since the beginning of recorded history.  Because of its
    antiquity, mead has acquired an almost magical reputation in our
    mythologies.  For example, the term honeymoon is intertwined with the
    custom of drinking honey-based mead for a month (moon) after the
    wedding; this practice was said to to ensure baby boys.  Mead making was
    once the province of a select, trained guild.  Now, it is open to all
    who have the patience and skill.  You are continuing this long and
    honored tradition.  Welcome aboard and enjoy.


The Types of Mead

    Mead is classified not by the kind of honey that it is made of, but by
    what else may have been added to it for flavoring.

        - TRADITIONAL is mead made with only honey, and perhaps a small
          amount of acid (to balance the sweetness).
        - METHEGLIN is mead made with additional spices, typically cloves, 
          cinnamon, or spices like that.
        - MELOMEL is mead made with the addition of fruit to traditional
          mead.  Melomel may also contain spices, like Metheglin.
        - CYSTER is a melomel made from apples.
        - PYMENT is a melomel made from grapes.
        - HIPPOCRAS is a spiced pyment.

    Depending on the initial amount of honey, and how attenuative the yeast
    is, the final mead may be dry or sweet.  A dry mead may also be called a
    sack.


What Kinds of Honey

    There are many kinds of honey, based on which flowers the bees collected
    the nectar from.  Honeys range in taste and color from the light clover
    and alfalfa to the stronger tasting (and darker) buckwheat.  Which you
    will use depends both on which you like the taste of, and what type of
    mead you are trying to make.  Stronger flavors go well in metheglins,
    while the milder honeys make a good base for melomels.

    You can buy honey in bulk from road side stands, or health food stores.
    You may also be lucky enough to live near a honey farm (or apiary) and
    can buy right from the beekeeper.  Look in the phone book for honey, or
    health food, or beekeepers.  Sometimes, exterminators will remove hives
    and give the bees to beekeepers, and sell the honey.  University
    agriculture departments occasionally sell honey.  Be inventive.  If all
    else fails, you may have to buy it from the grocery store.
    
    The honey will be either raw or processed in some way.  Raw honey has
    bits of wax, bee parts, dust, pollen, microorganisms, and the like in
    it.  You have the most control in how you process raw honey, but you
    also have the most to do.  Honey may be filtered, or blended, or even
    heat pasturized.  The more processed it is, the milder it is likely to
    be.  Processing also evaporates some of the honey's aroma.  Commercial,
    grocery store honey is the most processed.


Adding Acid

    Acid is added to the must both to adjust the ph and to balance the sweet
    flavor of the honey.  Yeast love an acidic environment.  Many other
    microorganisms don't.  The acid you add protects the must before the
    high alcohol level creates a hostile environment for the competition.

    Acid can be added in many forms.  Winemaking suppliers sell acid blends,
    powder or liquid.  Acid is measured in "as tartaric", or how acidic the
    must is compared to pure tartic acid.  For example, if the must is 0.5
    percent acid as tartic, it is as acidic as if 0.5 percent of the must is
    pure tartic acid.  Inexpensive test kits will let you measure the
    acidity so that you can adjust it.  Acid blends may be a combination of
    tartic, citric, malic and other natural acids.  Sometimes you may be
    able to get pure acids.  Acid may also be added from tea (tannic acid)
    or from the natural acid in fruits and berries.  This is why many
    melomels do not need additional acid.


How to Prepare the Must

    Raw mead is called "must".  You will want to add the honey to hot water
    in a large pot, but make sure the pot is not on the heat while doing
    this because the honey will fall to the bottom and carmelize (or stir
    vigorously if you leave it on the heat).  Use stainless steel or
    enameled (the acidic must will leach metallic flavor from aluminum
    kettles).

    Some mead recipes recommend only heating the mead to a high enough
    temperature to pasteurize it.  This is because boiling mead will drive
    off some of the delicate honey flavors.  Refer to the recipes from the
    mead-lovers digest (a list of them to follow).

    While heating if you skim the scum off while heating the must you will
    get a more clean and delicate flavor.  If you don't skim, you may wind
    up with a much less interesting brew: too much "waxy-taste" and
    "dullness" to the resulting mead.


Yeasts

    Mead is more a wine than beer, with a final alcohol level anywhere
    between 12 and 18 percent.  Wine yeasts, which have a higher alcohol
    tolerance, will ferment faster, or more completely than ale or lager
    yeast.  A partial list of some of the popular yeasts are:

        Champagnes (there is more than one strain), Epernay, Montrachet,
        Prise De Mousse and Tokay, Wyeast European Ale, Werker.

    This list is by no means exhaustive.  Each yeasts will impart its own
    unique characteristic to the mead.  Champagne ferments out very dry with
    small bubbles, and has a high alcohol tolerance.  Epernay has a fruity
    bouquet.  Montrachet, Prise De Mousse and Tokay are good general purpose
    wine yeasts.  Some yeasts will produce detectable levels of phenols (the
    throat burning part of cough medicine), but this ages out in bottle
    conditioning.

    There is a mead yeast (Werker) which has been reported to be quite good.
    It makes a very sweet and very lightly bubbly mead (it works to keep the
    sweetness of the honey).  Be aware that the Werker yeast starts slowly,
    so be extra careful about cleaning your equipment and pasteurizing the
    must so that the must does not get infected before the yeast has a
    strong foothold.


Yeast Nutrient

    Honey by itself is low in some of the nutrients that yeast need to
    reproduce and quickly ferment out the mead must.  Fermentation times can
    be measured in months as the yeast slowly trickles along.  Mead makers
    can add a nutrient to help the yeast.  Usually, the nutrient is added
    when the must is prepared.

    There are several kinds of nutrients.  Most winemaking shops will sell
    various salts designed for grape musts.  While this is helpful for mead,
    too much can leave an astringent metallic flavor that will take months
    or years in the bottle to age out.  Yeast extract, pulverized yeast, is
    also available.  Dead yeast are exploded ultrasonically or in a
    centrifuge, and sold as a powder.  Yeast extract will not leave the same
    metallic flavors as nutrients, but may be more difficult to find.  It is
    not possible to make your own yeast extract at home.


Fermentation

    Mead will take longer than beer to ferment.  Fermentation times can be
    measured in months, so get another carboy.  Mead likes to ferment a
    little warmer than beer (70F - 80F), but should be stored in a cool
    place to bottle condition.  You will have to rack mead (transfer it to a
    separate vessel, leaving behind the sediment) while it is fermenting.
    If you make any kind of mead beside traditional, you will have to rack
    about a week after starting to remove the bits of fruit and spices that
    settle out.  Rack again every several weeks to get the mead off the
    dormant yeast and other matter that settles out.  This improves the
    flavor and clarifies the mead.


Bottling

    First, you must make sure the mead has stopped fermenting.  Mead is such
    a slow fermenter that it may appear completely done, but continue to
    ferment in the bottles producing glass grenades.  Some techniques to
    make sure the mead is done fermenting are to take hydrometer readings
    for three to five consecutive days and make sure the readings aren't
    still falling; or make sure they are down around 1.000 or below.  You
    can also tell by seeing if the mead is clear and there are no visible
    (tiny) bubbles rising through the mead.  Be careful, though, because
    being clear is not enough.

    Use sturdy bottles, either cheap champagne (which are thick enough to
    take the higher carbonation) or returnable beer bottles.  The bottles
    may be capped or corked.  Do not use the thinner walled disposable twist
    off beer bottles.

    Mead that has finished fermentation and is then bottled will be flat.
    Sparkling mead is primed by adding a small amount of sugar at bottling
    time so that it is carbonated; the amount will vary depending upon how
    complete the fermentation is when you bottle.  The most you would ever
    want to add is about 1/2 cup of sugar for five gallons.

    Store the bottles in a cool dark place.  Mead is not as sensitive as
    beer to light (unless you have hops in it), but should not be left in
    bright light.


Wassail!

    While reading the mead-lovers digest you will occasionally see the word
    Wassail.  The following is the dictionary definition of wassail:

    was.sail' n. 1.a. A salutation or toast formerly given in drinking
    someone's health or as an expression of good will at a festivity.  1.b.
    The drink used in such toasting, commonly ale or wine spiced with
    roasted apples and sugar.  2. A festivity characterized by much
    drinking.  v. To drink to the health of; toast.

    The dictionary lists two pronunciations (wahs'ul, wah-sale').


Other Topics and Further Reading

    Beyond this basic information you should refer to recipes and further
    reading for details on how to make mead.  A compendium of recipes will
    be sent out in a special issue of the mead-lovers digest.


Books and Other Sources of Information (a partial list)

The Closet of Sir Kenelm Digby, Knight, Opened, edited by Anne MacDonell,
1669, 1910, Philip Lee Warner, Publisher.

    Digby worked for Queen Elizabeth I in her kitchen as, among other
    things, her mead maker.  This is a collection of over 100 recipes from
    the time.  This book may be ordered from the International Bee Research
    Association:
        International Bee Research Association (IRBA)
        18 North Road
        Cardiff, Wales, CF1 3 DY, UK
    Copies may also be obtained from the Society for Creative Anachronisms
    (SCA) in the states.  You might try rec.org.sca for pointers.

Brewing Mead/Wassail! In Mazers of Mead, Lt. Col. Robert Gayre and Charlie
Papazian, Brewers Publications

Making Mead, Bryan Acton and Peter Duncan, Amateur Winemaker Publications

The New Complete Joy of Home Brewing, Charlie Papazian, 1991, Avon Books

"Stimulate Your Senses With Mead", Susanne Price,
Zymurgy, Fall 1992, Vol. 5, No. 3, pp. 32-39

The Mead Lover's Digest, John Dilley, Coordinator,
Contact: mead-lovers-request@nsa.hp.com.

End of Mead Lover's Digest
************************
