Subject: Cider Digest #1138, 28 May 2004
From: cider-request@talisman.com




Cider Digest #1138                                         28 May 2004


                 Forum for Discussion of Cider Issues
                      Dick Dunn, Digest Janitor


Contents:
  boron deficiency in perry pear? ("chris horn")
  Apple Flavour in Cider (Andrew Lea)
  Re: Cider Digest #1137, 26 May 2004 (Lee Passey)
  RE: Cider Digest #1137, 26 May 2004 ("J. K. Davis")
  Subject : Apple flavor in cider (from Peter Jonhson ) ("Denis Gendron")
  Re: Apple flavor in cider (Dick Dunn)
  Apple character (Ken Schramm)
  Keeving (Jason MacArthur)


Send ONLY articles for the digest to cider@talisman.com.
Use cider-request@talisman.com for subscribe/unsubscribe/admin requests.
    When subscribing, please include your name and a good address in the
    message body unless you're sure your mailer generates them.
Archives of the Digest are available at www.talisman.com/cider
----------------------------------------------------------------------


Subject: boron deficiency in perry pear?
From: "chris horn" <agent_strangelove@hotmail.com>
Date: Wed, 26 May 2004 08:14:55 -0700


I have a young (grafted 2003 on OHxF 333) Blakney Red perry pear in the 
orchard below the house...  This year when it's putting out leaves, they 
come out fine and then start to get a lumpy pattern in the middle of the 
leave that then spreads.  The lumps cover the leave up to about 1/8" from 
the edge and the lumps are 1/16" diameter.  The leaves stay green and don't 
fall....  I took one off and sent it to the county extention agent to see 
what the deal was. He came back with the fact that he thought that it was a 
Boron deficiency.  I don't know if I buy this...  All of the rest (16) of 
the perry pears down there don't have this same problem.  That is the only 
Blakney Red....  I have never had my soil tested but all of the rest of the 
apples and pears on the property do just fine....


Any thoughts or had anyone else run across this?


Thanks
Chris Horn
Scappoose Oregon USA


"I still say a church steeple with a lightening rod on top shows a lack of 
confidence."
                                       -Doug McLeod


------------------------------


Subject: Apple Flavour in Cider
From: Andrew Lea <andrew_lea@compuserve.com>
Date: Wed, 26 May 2004 18:09:43 +0100


Peter Johnson wrote:
> 
> Has anyone been successful in retaining an apple flavor in their cider?  My
> cider seems to ferment most to all of the apple flavor out of the final
> product.  I have tried champagne, Epernay, Cotes des Blancs, Nottingham,
> Windsor Ale, and Doric yeast with varying degrees of dryness but none
> particularly had an apple flavor.  


Permit me to be slightly contentious and ask why cider should be 
expected to taste *of* apples? We don't expect beer to taste *of* barley 
nor wine to taste *of* grapes!.   In general the original flavours of 
any fermentable base are driven away or metabolised during fermentation, 
and are replaced by new flavours derived by the yeast acting on 
non-flavourful precursors from the fruit.  Some of these may be the same 
as, or closely related to, those which are lost during fermentation but 
it doesn't follow at all that a cider will taste *of* the fruit from 
which it came.


Having said all that, it is evident that different yeasts give different 
results on the same juices, and indeed that certain cider apples (and 
grapes) do give consistently characteristic tastes and aromas. 
Personally I have long ago given up using any cultured yeasts for my 
ciders, relying instead on a 'wild' mixed microflora succession steered 
with just a little sulphite. It works for me and gives much more 
'cidery' (if not 'appley') flavours.  It also gets away from the 
excessive dry bitterness (chemistry unknown!) which I personally find 
unpleasant in cider made with cultured wine yeasts (especially of the 
'Champagne' bayanus type).   Recently I did a paired tasting with some 
people here in the UK using a very aromatic apple (Stoke Red)  fermented 
with Bayanus and 'wild' yeast for comparison. The wild one won hands 
down. It was not entirely fair since there was an age difference in the 
samples too  but it was an eye-opener and I will hope to repeat it more 
systematically in a later season.


A final point is the effect of malo-lactic fermentation (MLF)., It is 
generally accepted (I think) in the wine world that the characteristic 
buttery flavour of Chardonnay does not develop until MLF.  It is also 
generally accepted that after MLF all 'fruitiness' is lost - hence white 
wine makers wanting to retain that character try to ensure MLF does not 
occur.  The same applies to ciders.   If you want fruity I would suggest 
trying a wild yeast fermentation and sulphite well at bottling to stop 
the MLF.


Good Luck!


Andrew
- -- 
Wittenham Hill Cider Page
http://www.cider.org.uk


------------------------------


Subject: Re: Cider Digest #1137, 26 May 2004
From: Lee Passey <lee@novomail.net>
Date: Wed, 26 May 2004 11:47:48 -0600


cider-request@talisman.com wrote:


>Subject: Apple flavor in cider
>From: "Peter Johnson" <johnson_peter@sbcglobal.net>
>Date: Sat, 22 May 2004 11:33:00 -0500
>
>Has anyone been successful in retaining an apple flavor in their cider?  My
>cider seems to ferment most to all of the apple flavor out of the final
>product.  I have tried champagne, Epernay, Cotes des Blancs, Nottingham,
>Windsor Ale, and Doric yeast with varying degrees of dryness but none
>particularly had an apple flavor.  Any assistance or suggestions would be
>greatly appreciated.
>
>Thank you,
>Peter Johnson
>  
>
I'm new to cider making, and not having any producing trees yet, I have 
started making cider from juices obtained elsewhere. This last weekend I 
invited a small group of home (beer) brewers over to taste some of my 
experiments from the winter. The tasting was blind, and included the 
only three commercial ciders available in Utah:  Ace, Hornsby's Draft 
and Hardcore.  I decanted the commercial ciders into my own bottles, and 
presented them as my own.


The results were interesting, if not surprising.


The three commercial ciders quickly claimed the last three spots. Some 
people said that they would rather drink water than the Hornsby cider. 
Ace was the preferred commercial cider, seeming clean and bright with no 
off flavors. This was my first attempt at brewing, so I attribute the 
fact that all four of my experiments were unanimously deemed superior to 
commercial cider to be more a statement about the quality of commercial 
ciders than about my own skills as a brewer.


Three of my four experiments were a blend of 50% Knudsen's organic apple 
juice (pasteurized) and 50% local farm apple juice (unpasteurized, a 
mixture of Red Delicious and Jonathan). To each batch I added a 12 oz. 
can of frozen apple juice concentrate, just to bring the sugar levels 
up. Batches 1 and 2 were fermented with English Cider yeast (WLP775) and 
batches 3 and 4 were fermented with Sweet Mead/Wine yeast (WLP720). If 
anything, the Sweet Mead/Wine yeast seemed to produce a drier product 
than the English Cider yeast. All of the batches were fermented in my 
cellar at a fairly constant 65 degrees Fahrenheit.


To my second batch of cider I added a bag of raisins to the juice during 
fermentation. This added a distinct "grapey" flavor to the resulting 
cider. Some people liked the result, and others did not. Those people 
who liked it _really_ liked it, and those people who didn't like it 
_really_ disliked it; there didn't seem to be much middle ground.


The consensus pick for the best cider was my very last batch. This batch 
had a very pleasant and noticeable "appley" flavor despite being fairly 
dry. In this last batch I used 100% unpasteurized local farm juice, 
which had already started foaming and bulging the plastic jugs it was 
stored in. Rather than adding new yeast, I poured the juice on top of 
the yeast (Sweet Mead) left in the fermenter after having racked off the 
previous batch.


Clearly, I did not control the variables sufficiently to be able to draw 
any real conclusions from my experiments, but I hypothesize that the 
more pronounced "appley" flavor of the last batch is due either to the 
use of fresh farm juice, with a higher percentage of the aromatic Red 
Delicious, or to the possibility that the fermentation was due in some 
larger extent to the wild yeast that had already gone to work on the 
juice. I seem to recall reading on the web somewhere about a more 
controlled experiment done in Canada testing the effects of different 
yeasts and which concluded that wild yeasts produced the best flavors, 
despite being somewhat more prone to failure. I plan on testing these 
hypotheses in the fall.


------------------------------


Subject: RE: Cider Digest #1137, 26 May 2004
From: "J. K. Davis" <andiroba@hotmail.com>
Date: Wed, 26 May 2004 16:47:38 -0400


I'm seeking a automatic (vice manual) apple mill/press to make batches of 
farm hard cider.  Does anyone have any recommendations where I can find one?


BTW, I took the Washington State University-sponsored week long cider making 
course, and it was terrific.  It covered the whole range of cider-making.  I 
now feel confident that I can make a wholesome, quality product.


Jan Davis
andiroba@hotmail.com


------------------------------


Subject: Subject : Apple flavor in cider (from Peter Jonhson )
From: "Denis Gendron" <gagnond@endirect.qc.ca>
Date: Wed, 26 May 2004 08:37:29 -0400


I have tried for many years also ,to get an obvious apple flavor into my
"dry cider" experimenting with apples varietys,and yeasts strains, with
fair results but not to my satisfaction. Last year (03) trials were more
succesfull, due to a miscalculation with sugar addition upon
pre-bottling fermentation ( sparkling type). I added twice the amount
recommended, which resulted in a sparkling liquid and a remnant of sugar
I guess...increasing the taste quite a bit. I used a centrifugal juice
extractor, and apples with heavy odoriferant bouquet , golden delicious,
golden russet, jonathan which must have contributed to this relative
success too. I never added real juice ,or essences, technics commonly
utilysed, with pertinent results, looking for a traditionnal real 100%
home made cider. Denis Gendron gagnond@endirect.qc.ca


------------------------------


Subject: Re: Apple flavor in cider
From: rcd@talisman.com (Dick Dunn)
Date: Wed, 26 May 2004 23:50:09 -0600 (MDT)


"Peter Johnson" <johnson_peter@sbcglobal.net> wrote:
> Has anyone been successful in retaining an apple flavor in their cider?  My
> cider seems to ferment most to all of the apple flavor out of the final
> product...


The responses to this generally fall into the following categories:
  * That's normal!  Fermentation destroys the compounds that give the
    specific apple-fruit taste.
  * Why do you want your cider to taste like apples?  Do you expect wine
    to taste like grapes?


Note wrt the first point, IF fermentation goes to completion, you're going
to lose the specific apple taste (although you'll get tastes reminiscent of
the fruit).  That's just the way it works.  But that suggests a couple of
approaches which are used.  The first is to convince the fermentation to
grind to a halt before it finished fermenting out--e.g., the French
approach of starving the yeast of nutrients.  The second is to let the
cider ferment out completely (no residual sugar), then stabilize it to
prevent a renewed fermentation, then "back-sweeten" with juice.  Hold
some of your juice in reserve and don't let it ferment (sulfite and chill,
freeze, whatever), then add it back after fermentation is done, and be
sure the result, by whatever combination of measures, won't re-start
fermenting after you bottle it.  (Yes, that gives you a cider with some
sweetness left in it.  But I'm guessing that if you're looking to have
some fruit character, the sweetness won't be a problem.)
- ---
Dick Dunn          rcd@talisman.com          Hygiene, Colorado  USA


------------------------------


Subject: Apple character
From: Ken Schramm <schramk@mail.resa.net>
Date: Thu, 27 May 2004 20:30:42 -0400


Peter Johnson asked about apple character, and in order of apple
character predominance, my best ciders have been fermented: 


1) Spontaneously, with the requisite instability and inconsistent results


2) With D-47, the Lalvin Cotes de Blancs strain, which keeps a decent
amount of apple, but can also add some citrus notes


3) With 71B-1122, which stays apple-y, but pushed a little buttery character.


Your mileage may vary.  Hardly authoritative, but one data point. 
Blends of primarily N. Spy and Jonathon, with a few Golden D's, some
Spygolds, and a few Calville Blancs, Kingston Blacks and Yarlington
Mills.  I avoid the Champagne strains.  


Good luck,
Ken Schramm
Troy, MI


------------------------------


Subject: Keeving
From: Jason MacArthur <rotread@localnet.com>
Date: Fri, 28 May 2004 07:10:54 -0400




Terry Bradshaw, you mentioned in the last Cider Digest that you had 
performed a semi-succesfull keeve.  I am curious as to what type of 
apples you used for this, specifically what types of rootstocks were 
they grown on and were they fertilized trees or abandoned ones.  Enjoy! 
Jason MacArthur


------------------------------


End of Cider Digest #1138
*************************