Subject: Cider Digest #1183, 6 December 2004
From: cider-request@talisman.com




Cider Digest #1183                                         6 December 2004


                 Forum for Discussion of Cider Issues
                      Dick Dunn, Digest Janitor


Contents:
  Has anybody attempted to analytically characterise flavor? (Tracy Camp)
  RE: Cider vs. Juice aroma ("McGonegal, Charles")
  Taste Expectations ("Drew Zimmerman")
  Flavor Wheel & Cider Competition ("Drew Zimmerman")
  Keeving, can't follow the instructions (mstokes@umenfa.maine.edu)


Send ONLY articles for the digest to cider@talisman.com.
Use cider-request@talisman.com for subscribe/unsubscribe/admin requests.
    When subscribing, please include your name and a good address in the
    message body unless you're sure your mailer generates them.
Archives of the Digest are available at www.talisman.com/cider
----------------------------------------------------------------------


Subject: Has anybody attempted to analytically characterise flavor?
From: Tracy Camp <campt@polyserve.com>
Date: Fri, 3 Dec 2004 08:45:07 -0800 (PST)


I have a college-level background in biochemistry, but don't really have 
the resources or the chemistry background to get very specific.  However I 
did recently pick up a used working order DU-52 UV/Vis Spectrophotometer 
and have been attempting to keep records of trans/abs. across the range of 
my instrument as my fall juice has been fermenting.


My hope is to eventually be able to correlate flavors with peaks in my 
spectrums, and thus gain some predictive control when I select apples 
before pressing.


Unfortunately I think I'm not really going to be able to tell anything
because so far the only really strong 'peaks' I've been able to detect
from the noise of the instrument is alchohol (as compared against a really
decent 40 proof grain vodka made by the Bend Distillery).  I suspect my 
project is flawed due to the multitude of flavor compounds and the 
dillutions at which they are present.


Can't really afford to own and maintain a gas chromatograph, but I was 
wondering if anybody has ever tried anything similar.


Tracy
OpenMars
Portland OR


------------------------------


Subject: RE: Cider vs. Juice aroma
From: "McGonegal, Charles" <Charles.McGonegal@uop.com>
Date: Fri, 3 Dec 2004 10:58:22 -0600 


In CD#1182 Andrew writes:
> Hence in Charles' brain there is provoked a memory of juice, but in my
brain and Dick's there isn't.


I want to clarify one teensy item here.  In this discussion, I'm not arguing
for a direct correspondence between juice and cider - not something like
'cider is directly correlated to juice - simply scaled in character to some
degree.'  Cider certainly has its own balance and also the effects of
fermentation and cellaring.


But cider (and not _just_ the aroma) certainly does provoke apple
associations in my brain - but not _just_ the juice.  There's more to the
experience of tasting an orchard fresh apple than the juice in said apple.
There's the flesh (not even the flesh tastes the same from core to skin, or
sun to shade), skin, seeds, core (if you're the type who devours the whole
thing) and the environment around you. And I think that good cider (or wine)
carries elements of its origins (all the steps) to the taster.


So once we finish talking about what 'like' is like, maybe we can start on
what 'is' is ;-)


Charles McGonegal
AEppelTreow Winery


------------------------------


Subject: Taste Expectations
From: "Drew Zimmerman" <drewzimmer@comcast.net>
Date: Fri, 3 Dec 2004 13:08:37 -0800


Well, I'm afraid I'm the one that got this apple flavor vs. cider flavor 
thing started when I lamented to Charles about why Americans expect 
cider to taste like fresh apples when they don't expect wine to taste 
like grapes.  The reason this came up is I'm beginning production of a 
commercial product and am tearing myself up with the realization that if 
I want to sell cider, it's going to have to meet the customer's 
expectation of what cider "is" and unfortunately that expectation is 
sparkling apple juice with a kick.  I'll be making this product, and it 
will be a lot better than what's on the grocery shelf mainly because I'm 
using fresh, tree ripened fruit instead of concentrate.  I figure that 
if I can get folks to drink the appley stuff, I can maybe get them 
curious about the other stuff, you know, cider - with fruit esters, 
fusels, floral notes, astringency, bitterness and body.  I'm making some 
of that too, even if I have to drink it all myself!
We lost our cider drinking heritage somewhere along the way and it's 
been replaced with alcohol laced apple flavored soda.  Here's a link to 
a pretty good paper on what happened.  
http://mason.gmu.edu/~drwillia/cider.html
Drew


------------------------------


Subject: Flavor Wheel & Cider Competition
From: "Drew Zimmerman" <drewzimmer@comcast.net>
Date: Fri, 3 Dec 2004 14:19:35 -0800


There is an AICV Flavour Wheel for cider from the Association of 
Cidermakers' and Fruitwine Makers' of the EU.  There's a copy of it in 
the course notes of the Principles and Practice course put on at WSU Mt. 
Vernon.  It may be proprietary, but if not, I'll try to chase down a 
link or address for it.
The concept of using a spider diagram to create a flavor wheel is an 
interesting one.  Spider diagrams are used in product development to 
represent the flavor profile in a graphic manor.  I think this is an 
excellent way to represent your recipe or blend and assure consistency 
from batch to batch or use as ground work for preference testing.  As 
far as getting judges to use them in providing information to entrants 
in a competition, we're perhaps asking a bit too much.  It takes quite a 
bit of detailed work and training to develop the scales on the diagram.  
For instance what would you use to represent the 'lots' value for 
astringency, or diacetyl, or acetaldehyde, or mouse?  It would also 
involve extensive training to get everyone on the same page as far as 
values of attributes go and every judge would probably have a different 
idea as to what was what.
Judging and sensory evaluation are two quite different things.  Although 
they require the same skills and talents, the judge applies them 
differently than someone who is doing evaluation.  The evaluator takes 
each element i. e. odor, taste, flavor, aroma, mouthfeel, aftertaste, 
etc., and places a value judgment one each one and forms an opinion of 
the overall product.  The judge has a different objective, he is looking 
to screen the samples and eliminate the non contenders so that he can 
make decisions on the remainder.  It is common practice for judges to 
not even taste a good percentage of the entries because of faults 
detected in the odor.  When the judge is down to the technically 
perfect, he chooses the ones he likes best.  A subjective decision.  The 
evaluator identifies the strong and weak points of each element and 
makes an objective report.  To do both of these at the same time is next 
to impossible, a judge may be asked to judge 150 entries in a session, I 
doubt if a sensory analyst could do more then a couple of dozen.
So if you want to know how your cider stacks up to others in a 
subjective assessment by judges, submit it in a competition.  If you 
want to know the strengths and weaknesses of your cider and the reasons 
for each, submit it for sensory evaluation and analysis.  One thing to 
remember, only the judges award medals.
Drew


------------------------------


Subject: Keeving, can't follow the instructions
From: mstokes@umenfa.maine.edu
Date: Sun, 5 Dec 2004 11:59:14 -0500


I also received a small bottle of PME enzyme for keeving with full 
instructions from Gary at the Coleraine Cider Day in early 
November.  Unfortunately, being a college professor, I can't read 
the instructions correctly!


I added the PME to 5 gallons of a 10 gallon batch of juice that had 
been sulfited one week earlier and in which there was no evidence 
of natural fermentation.  I also pitched a rehydrated and started 
Lalvin yeast at the same time.  My objective was to have two 
batches of the same juice fermented under the same conditions 
with the same yeast, one keeved and one not.  


The juice was in a covered plastic brewing bucket (mistake #1) with 
an OG of 1048 at 62 degrees Fahrenheit and 0.475% acidity as 
tartaric acid, which is rather low I believe .  I then failed to realize 
that the CaCl2 weight to be added was 87g per 100 liters, not per 5 
gallons (mistake #2).  Consequently I added all the CaCl2 that I 
had, only 68.5g, which later turned out to be 2H2O not 6H2O (2 
molecules of water not 6, as specified by Gary.)  By calculation 
from the molecular weights, I added four times the recommended 
amount of Ca ions (mistake #3.)  The enzyme, yeast and Calcium 
Chloride were all added together one evening. 


Within twelve hours I had evidence of a brown cap forming and 
within 36 hours this was a solid cover across the top of the liquid.  I 
could not see what was happening underneath this cover as this 
was all in a white brewing bucket.  I then had no time to rack off 
the liquor for another 36 hours, (mistake #4).  The yeast kicked in 
and the fermentation started to break up the brown cap.  I finally 
racked to a carboy 3 days after beginning the keeving.  The juice 
was very clear but there was a thick brown gelatinous mass in the 
bottom of the bucket.  This was filtered through a Whatman #1 filter 
paper (coarse) to salvage some of the liquid.


During this time John Howard was telling us through the Digest  
that he was having great difficulty getting anything to happen at 51 
degrees, so I was surprised that my keeving happened so quickly.  
Clearly, a warmer temperature really moves these reactions along 
(Boyle's Law??).  As someone else said in the Digest, if the cap 
falls you get a very rapid fermentation.  You do indeed!  My keeved 
batch is much clearer than the non-keeved but after racking to a 
carboy the fermentation is boiling.  At this racking the keeved juice 
was 1044 SG compared to 1036 for the non-keeved.  Initial 
fermentation rate was thus reduced.  After four more days I 
reracked the keeved cider to remove some of the debris that was 
carried over initially and topped up with unkeeved cider.  SG was 
by then 1030.  There has been no sign of any rekeeving of this 
unkeeved juice and fermentation continues at quite a pace.


>From this fiasco I have learned the following:
1.  Read the instructions, stupid.
2.  Keeve in a clear vessel so you can see what is happening.
3.  Doing it at 60 degrees or above really increases the rate of 
reaction.
4.  Adding too much Calcium appears not to be detrimental.


I will be interested to see how the two fermentations continue and 
will bring some of each batch to the Bring Your Own Ciders tasting 
workshop that Paul Correnty, Charlie Olchowski and I host on the 
Sunday morning of Cider Days in Coleraine. 


Martin Stokes
University of Maine
stokes@maine.edu 


------------------------------


End of Cider Digest #1183
*************************