Subject: Cider Digest #1212, 3 April 2005
From: cider-request@talisman.com




Cider Digest #1212                                         3 April 2005


                 Forum for Discussion of Cider Issues
                      Dick Dunn, Digest Janitor


Contents:
  pH meters (John Emmett)


Send ONLY articles for the digest to cider@talisman.com.
Use cider-request@talisman.com for subscribe/unsubscribe/admin requests.
    When subscribing, please include your name and a good address in the
    message body unless you're sure your mailer generates them.
Archives of the Digest are available at www.talisman.com/cider
----------------------------------------------------------------------


Subject: pH meters
From: John Emmett <jlemmett@iinet.com>
Date: Thu, 31 Mar 2005 21:39:41 -0800


Hello all,


    I wanted to offer an additional point of view to that of Andrew Lea on 
pH meters.  Both Andrew and I have, in our professional careers,  
access to the finest scientific instrumentation and have  technicians 
to keep it calibrated for us.  While wonderful, it perhaps insulates 
from other experiences.  Since I retired several years ago, I have 
built a rather sophisticated lab in my home which is largely for 
research on matters unrelated to food.  In the course of setting up the 
lab I purchased a simple hand held pH meter more for completeness than 
any plan at the time.  The hand held unit I purchased is called " Heavy 
Duty Waterproof pHTestr3+ with Temperature Readout" manufactured 
Oakton.  It is a double junction temperature compensated unit costing 
$99.95.  I purchased it and an extra electrode assembly from 
Cole-Parmer Instrument Company.


    I have occasion to use it perhaps one or two dozen times a year, 
certainly not enough to keep it stored in liquid and calibrated.  My 
primary uses for the device are to measure the pH of apple juices, 
pickles, salsas, and other canned foods, as well as the occasional pH 
measurement of soils.  Every now or then I will run a titration curve 
with it.  In using and storing this device, I note that when it is 
manufactured, stored at the chemical supply house, and shipped to the 
customer it is not wet.  Therefore I use it with the following 
protocol.  When I take take it from its storage location, I place it in 
a glass of tap water for 2-3 hours before I turn it on.  Then I turn it 
on and place it in pH 7.0 buffer solution and after three minutes 
engage the calibration procedure.  The calibration procedure is 
automatic and does not require any screwdriver adjustment.  I then 
rinse it in tap water and place it in the pH 4.01 buffer solution, wait 
three minutes, and engage the automatic calibration.  I repeat this 
procedure, rinsing before each change of solution, once or twice as 
necessary to achieve the correct measurement at both pH's.  I then 
check the instrument with buffer solutions of pH 1.68 and 10.0.  
Generally it is on at 10.0 and reads .04 high on the 1.68 buffer.  
Inexpensive instruments such as this only provide for calibration at 
two points, wheras high end scientific instruments allow several 
calibration points.  With this instrument and protocol I am confident 
that in the pH range from 3.0 to 8.0 I am within plus or minus 0.025 or 
better, and I have verified that with a high end instrument.    During 
the use of the instrument during a day, I will recheck the calibration 
two or three times to assure that there is no drift. When not 
immediately in use, I put it in tap water.  When I am finished, I rinse 
the unit in tap water, air dry it, replace the protective end cap, put 
it back in its plastic box, and put it away.  I have now been using 
this unit for seven years with no difficulty.  When I originally 
purchased it, I purchased an extra electrode assembly which I have 
never had to use. This instrument is far more reliable than I 
anticipated.


    Fore those who do not have experience with electronic pH meters, I 
might offer a few observations. In what I have written above, I Keep 
saying "tap water".  Don't use the instrument with distilled water or, 
more importantly, deionized water.  The glass electrode of these 
devices is not stable in a deionized water environment.  The glass 
electrodes will not take any mechanical abuse, so handle it very 
carefully.  When using buffer solutions, pour out some of the buffer 
solution into another container and use that to make your tests.  
Always rinse the instrument in tap water before placing it in a 
different buffer or test solution.  When finished, throw out the used 
buffer solutions.  Do not pour them back into the stock bottles.  The 
buffer solutions are inexpensive and are available at chemical supply 
houses or from anyone who sells pH meters.


    I have also tried to use the narrow range pH papers and find them 
entirely useless. I cannot reproducibly measure 0.1 pH unit.   I am not 
sure whether the problem is the quality of my color vision, the type of 
light source used for the color comparison, or the inability to 
properly compare a wet and a dry color strip.  Whatever it is, it 
doesn't work for me. With colored solutions, it is even worse.


    With regard to measurements, always remember that a bad measurement is 
worse than no measurement, as one tends to use the bad measurement.  If 
pH is important to you, make a good measurement.


    Good luck,


    John


------------------------------


End of Cider Digest #1212
*************************