Subject: Cider Digest #1271, 30 October 2005
From: cider-request@talisman.com




Cider Digest #1271                                         30 October 2005


                 Forum for Discussion of Cider Issues
                      Dick Dunn, Digest Janitor


Contents:
  Stuck fermentation gravity level ("Diane Gagnon")
  Karmijn De Sonnaville ("John C. Campbell III")
  Re: Sweeter Cider, Apple flavor and alchohol (Dick Dunn)
  PA cider producers? (Benjamin Watson)


Send ONLY articles for the digest to cider@talisman.com.
Use cider-request@talisman.com for subscribe/unsubscribe/admin requests.
    When subscribing, please include your name and a good address in the
    message body unless you're sure your mailer generates them.
Archives of the Digest are available at www.talisman.com/cider
----------------------------------------------------------------------


Subject: Stuck fermentation gravity level
From: "Diane Gagnon" <gagnond@endirect.qc.ca>
Date: Thu, 27 Oct 2005 11:17:55 -0400


At what gravity level can we consider  a fermentation  stuck ? 
This year fermentation ( golden delicious, golden russet, geneva) started
at 1060 and seems to be coming to a stop at 1020 so I am just woundering
if this level is acceptable .
How come the specific gravity reading are different from tree sources ? 
Two books reading     : 1060 = 9.6% abv = 163 gr/lt
                                          = 7.75%     = 131  
hydrometer reading    :  1060= 8%          = 156 
Which one to rely on ?


------------------------------


Subject: Karmijn De Sonnaville
From: "John C. Campbell III" <jccampb@tseassoc.com>
Date: Thu, 27 Oct 2005 11:39:50 -0400


Well, it may be that  'terroir'  has some dramatic effect even on this 
variety,  but I must say that  I am completely underwhelmed with the  
highly touted  Karmijn De Sonnaville.  Zeke Goodband at Scot Farms in 
Vermont was so very kind enough to arrange to ship some of the fruit 
down to me that I might test it's effect on my blends this year.  (I 
plan to add them in a mixture I already have 'working' in a five gallon 
carboy).


We put in a handful of the species from a variety of highly reputable 
nurseries that we have had good success from, a few years ago but the 
trees are not mature enough to yield fruit.  I confess that the 
description in the various nursery catalogs drew us to putting them in 
having never even tasting the fruit.  Unless they work some 'magic' in 
my blend, I submit that the fruit description writers should be 
relegated to writing cheap suit  advertisements in the London and New 
York daily papers after submitting to sterilization so that they don't 
pass on their genes to a new generation (of course the same might be 
said of solicitors). Diogenes Laertius of Anacharsis (Circa 200)  native 
of Laerte in Cilicia, said, `The market is a place set apart where men 
may deceive one another.'  Listen to the hype out of a selection of the 
catalogs  (the first one in particular ... they name names -snicker- I 
have to wonder what compelled Manhart to ascribe such values to the fruit)


KARMIJN (pronounced carmine) DE SONNAVILLE - A new Cox's Orange Pippin 
cross with Jonathan from the Netherlands. The round fruit, variable in 
shape, is red orange over a greenish yellow background. Manhart says," 
biting into a crisp Karmijn" will cause you to "come up out of your 
chair", very rich, juicy and "one of the best liked of high flavored 
apples" Karmijn ripens in September:


a Dutch variety, Karmijn De Sonnaville This intensely flavored red 
russetted apple from Holland measures the highest in both sugars and 
acids. It is a triploid cross of Coxs Orange and Jonathan. It is many 
peoples picked favorite, however, it is so highly flavorful and aromatic 
that it overwhelms some tastes when just off the tree. Put this 
excellent winter keeper in a box when it ripens in mid October and wait 
about a month for the complex mellow flavors to start shining through. A 
vigorous grower and somewhat scab resistant


Ripens early October. Cox Orange Pippin cross- A connoisseur variety 
with a very nice texture and intense flavor that mellows after one month 
of cold storage. Also an excellent addition to sweet or hard cider. 
Another festival favorite! Performs best in cool summer climates. 
Triploid cross: unsuitable as a pollinizer for other varieties. 
Mid-season bloom


KARMIJN DE SONNAVILLE   Netherlands 1949 (Jonathan x Cox's Orange Pippin)
Rich robust flavor with masses of sugar and acidity and crisp juicy 
flesh. One of the strongest-flavored apples comparable to Ashmead's 
Kernel. Apples red or with red flush and larger than either parent. 
Flowers are large and beautiful. Susceptible to apple scab and grows 
best in cooler summer areas.


Crisp?  Try "Mealy" Taste? I know the fruit Zeke sent me was fairly 
fresh picked ... the only way that apple would make me "come up out of 
my chair?" would be if someone fetched one up against the side of my 
head with some force. The local market sells Honeycrisps that have twice 
the taste impact.  Certianly the very worst 'Faux' Foxwhelp I ever 
tasted was ten times the De Sonnaville that I bit into this morning with 
a friend sharing the experience (to make sure I wasn't daft or biased).  
Complexity?  Pish Tosh, a straight forward Cox's Pippin (much less a 
really profoundly complex apple such as the Kingston Black) completely 
overshadows the taste of the Karmijn De Sonnaville, as does the Esopus 
Spitzenburg. I gather the apple is coming to wide acceptance in England; 
it's certainly cropping up in catalogs here in 'States like (pun 
intended a "bad apple").  What has been everyone else's experience / 
appraisal on this 'miraculous' fruit?
- -sigh-
Now all I need to do is to quickly  find someone over here on east coast 
U.S. with a spare bushel of Foxwhelps ..... they'll ship me since I've 
none this year.
jccampb


------------------------------


Subject: Re: Sweeter Cider, Apple flavor and alchohol
From: Dick Dunn <rcd@talisman.com>
Date: Thu, 27 Oct 2005 11:37:49 -0600


In CD 1270, "David Blakely" <slodave69@hotmail.com> asked:


> 1. How do you measure alchohol content? Do you use the same formula that is 
> used in beer? We have the specific gravity measurements at all stages of 
> fermentation.


Sure, same as beer.  Easy way is to take FG - OG and read that number off
on a multi-scale hydrometer that has a potential-alcohol scale.


> 2. How can I make the final product taste more like apples?
> 3. How can I make the final product sweeter? (Saachrin is not an option)


Two responses...


The harshly cynical:  If you want it to be sweet and taste like apples, why
are you fermenting it?  (ref an old refrain and discussion on "You don't
expect wine to taste like grapes; why do you expect cider to taste like
apples?"  Note that I say "taste like", not "taste of".)


More useful:  Hold back some juice from fermentation.  After the
fermentation is done, stabilize the cider and back-sweeten with the
juice you saved.  This gives both sweetness and the unfermented-apple
character you're asking for.
- -- 
Dick Dunn          rcd@talisman.com          Hygiene, Colorado  USA


------------------------------


Subject: PA cider producers?
From: Benjamin Watson <bwatson@worldpath.net>
Date: Fri, 28 Oct 2005 23:29:16 -0400


Fellow CDers,


Someone asked me recently if I knew of any commercial cider producers 
in Pennsylvania. After a couple of hours searching on the web, I turned 
up one winery that makes cider (one more than I had listed before). 
It's Stoney Acres Winery in Nescopeck (www.stoneyacreswinery.com).


This person is doing a cheese tasting in PA and wanted to use ciders 
made in the state (an added incentive is the fact that PA has some of 
the more draconian liquor laws in the nation).


So, does anyone out there have any recommendations or places that I've 
missed?


Ben Watson
Francestown, NH


P.S. One final reminder that Cider Day 2005 will be held next weekend, 
Nov. 5-6 in western Mass. (for details and schedule, see 
www.ciderday.org). Hopefully we won't get the typical 10-12 inches of 
rain that we have been getting pretty much every weekend in October up 
here in sunny New England.


------------------------------


End of Cider Digest #1271
*************************