Subject: Cider Digest #1281, 3 December 2005
From: cider-request@talisman.com




Cider Digest #1281                                         3 December 2005


                 Forum for Discussion of Cider Issues
                      Dick Dunn, Digest Janitor


Contents:
  Re: Pneumatic's question.. (Claude Jolicoeur)
  Re: racking off (Tim Bray)
  Report, 5th annual CiderMaker's Forum, at Vintage Virginia Apples. ("John ...)


Send ONLY articles for the digest to cider@talisman.com.
Use cider-request@talisman.com for subscribe/unsubscribe/admin requests.
    When subscribing, please include your name and a good address in the
    message body unless you're sure your mailer generates them.
Archives of the Digest are available at www.talisman.com/cider
----------------------------------------------------------------------


Subject: Re: Pneumatic's question..
From: Claude Jolicoeur <cjoli@gmc.ulaval.ca>
Date: Wed, 30 Nov 2005 17:27:12 -0500


In Cider Digest #1280, 30 November 2005
>From: Randallrun@aol.com
>Date: Sun, 27 Nov 2005 13:34:47 EST
>
>I'm liking this idea, and think it's something I will persue, as I've long  
>been wanting to design and build my own grinder and press.
> My only question (today!) is, what kind of valve would be best for  this 
>bladder? Can't think off the top of my head what a simple air valve  looks
like.
>  Thanks! and what a great idea!
>   Rick in Oregon


Rick, the air springs (or bladders) I have seen simply had a 1/4 or 1/2 or
3/4 NPT hole in which you may fit any pneumatic fixture. For my part, I
searched for a simple tyre air valve that would have such a fitting, but I
didn't find any. What I found, however, is a fixture that is normally sold
for pressurized reservoirs. It includes a fast release valve, a security
valve, a pressure gauge and an inflating valve. Works great.
Claude


------------------------------


Subject: Re: racking off
From: Tim Bray <tbray@mcn.org>
Date: Wed, 30 Nov 2005 18:39:25 -0800


Melissa asked:


>  Should I be
>racking off immediately again due to the 6 or so inches of sediment at
>the bottom of the carboy?


I'd say yes - in fact, check the gravity; if it threw that much sediment, 
it's probably fermented out and time to bottle (or bulk age).


Cheers,
Tim
Albion, CA


------------------------------


Subject: Report, 5th annual CiderMaker's Forum, at Vintage Virginia Apples.
From: "John C. Campbell III" <jccampb@tseassoc.com>
Date: Fri, 02 Dec 2005 15:05:18 -0500


So the 5th Annual CiderMakers Forum was held November, 19th, at Vintage 
Virginia Apples (North Garden, Va.). 
After the introductions by Charlotte Shelton, Tom Burford (Monroe, Va) 
gave a presentation on establishing a cider orchard including some round 
table discussion on the matter. At one point, Tom wryly opined that some 
25% (I think that was his figure) of the trees that we get from 
Nurseries are likely to not even be the variety that we thought we were 
buying.


This was followed by our own Chas McGonegal's (AEppelTreow Winery, 
Burlington, Wi,  (aeppeltreow.com)) first presentation regarding the 
commercial production of Artisan cider. (mechanical processes, 
production theory, etc.).


After this Diane Flynt ("Blue Ridge Cider, Laurel Fork, Va. 
(blueridgeorchard.com))  in conjunction with Chuck Shelton 
(Vintagevirginiaapples.com) gave presentations regarding the issues 
facing cider makers in the field.


Then Chas returned to the podium, covering the Marketing, production and 
legal issues and challenges facing commercial cidermakers today as he 
has experienced them in his winery / tasting room circumstance. and then 
a round table and something very, very interesting to finish up the 
sessions;  Diane and Chuck had brought a number of single variety 
samples of raw juice from their respective orchards for us to taste.  
Chuck had inadvertently let one jug of Hewes (Virginia) crab juice start 
to 'work' with native yeasts so we had the opportunity to sample it in 
both states! It was very, very interesting, a thick juice almost of the 
caliber of Kingston Black (Sorry, apologies to Chas who cares not for 
K.B.'s ) and the Harrison's juice was even more dramatic and rounded in 
taste. 


Tom Burford has ruminated that he feels the Harrison could 'save' the 
American cider industry, and I for one agree whole heartedly.  Unlike my 
precious Kingstons, it is not prone to biennialism for one.   If that 
"juice" were available in your local megamart the Chinese concentrate 
created 'cider' that is appearing back here wouldn't be a threat, to our 
local large and small producers, such as Baughers, Weber's farm, etc.,  
and if the resulting country ciders and chapitalized ciders were on the 
shelves in your local purveyor of alcoholic beverages .... there's be a 
lot fewer bottles of wine flying off the shelves.  I have one of the 
trees (Harrison)  in ground two years, and lost the other one to pine 
voles last summer;  and had never tasted the juice, but you can be sure 
I've ordered two more whips to go in their places ... inside a buried 4' 
diameter fence of rat wire for the wretched voles to break their teeth 
on this time.


Dr. Chris White, (whitelabs.com) through the assistance of JoAnne 
Carilli-Stevenson (Sales & Marketing Manager, White Labs, Inc. Pure 
Yeast & Fermentation) kindly overnighted enough of White Labs "English 
Cider Yeast" to me here in Annapolis, for Mary and I to carry down to 
the Forum for all the participants to take away a vial to experiment 
with and has expressed a desire to be one of the presenters at the 2006 
Forum, where hopefully we will hear explanations of the advantages of 
using tailored yeasts such as he has developed in the production of 
cider and this years participants will be able to share their hands on 
experiences with his yeast ... at the next conference.


Those of us in the east coast region from Pa. south, face a different 
set of challenges (increased fireblight problems for one) than the New 
England states do, or the West coast contingent where I understand 
fireblight is by and large non-existent. And the New England states are 
way ahead of us on organizing themselves.  Next week I believe is the 
seminar orchestrated by Prof. Ian Merwin in New York (it should be 
astounding, Prof. Merwin, amongst his other credits is the leading man 
in stone fruits on the east coast). ... and as I understand it? Has such 
notables as Andrew Lea, chemist / plant biochemist / food scientist of 
the late great Long Ashton Research Center at his disposal.  Andrew was 
at the festival in New England just recently as well and to all accounts 
made major contributions with his presentations. 


We down here,  have a long way to go to 'catch up' to carry our share of 
the load.    A focus for excellence in cider in our region is vital, I 
don't think any of us are really much in competition with each other,  
and we should recognize the fact and act accordingly. We have to grow 
the market share as Chas suggests, not battle it out with other cider 
producers.  So those of you in this region, flag next November on your 
calendars for the sixth annual Cider Makers forum and spread the word. 
For those of you belonging to NAFEX ... I will be providing the 
Gathering Editor (Victoria) with a CD of the photography we've taken at 
the last two Forums that hopefully you will get to see in their 
publications.  Perhaps we'll have the good fortune to see a NAFEX 
representative presenting to us in the near future as well.
jccampb


------------------------------


End of Cider Digest #1281
*************************