Subject: Cider Digest #1287, 31 December 2005
From: cider-request@talisman.com




Cider Digest #1287                                         31 December 2005


                 Forum for Discussion of Cider Issues
                      Dick Dunn, Digest Janitor


Contents:
  Re: press construction question (Bill)
  Re: Press Construction (Claude Jolicoeur)
  Re: using honey in bottle fermentation (Benjamin Watson)
  apple brandy ("Howard, John")
  Re: using honey in bottle fermentation (Tim Bray)
  Re: 2005 Glows Competition (dubious entries?) (Dick Dunn)
  RE: Cider Digest #1286, 22 December 2005 ("Mike Beck")
  Re: Cider brandy (michael arighi)
  RE: Press Construction ("chris horn")
  Re: past articles (Benjamin Watson)
  Re:  Harrison scionwood question ("John C. Campbell III")
  cider brandy in Australia (warwick)


Send ONLY articles for the digest to cider@talisman.com.
Use cider-request@talisman.com for subscribe/unsubscribe/admin requests.
    When subscribing, please include your name and a good address in the
    message body unless you're sure your mailer generates them.
Archives of the Digest are available at www.talisman.com/cider
----------------------------------------------------------------------


Subject: Re: press construction question
From: Bill <squeeze@mars.ark.com>
Date: Thu, 22 Dec 2005 22:40:29 -0800


Dave - 20" racks are pretty big for a bottle jack, but I'd advise 
getting the biggest you can find - as you say, you don't have to use all 
the pressure available if your framework starts complaining - I think 
you meant you'll use 4 cheeses per load? more layers, made thinner works 
best, and you *must* use good racks between


my somewhat heavier press is detailed here:
http://mars.ark.com/~squeeze/pressing/
it uses 24" racks and has 60 ton hydraulics capable of 3000psi, but I 
never need more than 2000# - and no, the pulp will not heat up measureably


if you can get 1 liter out of each 3-3.5# of pulp, you know you've done 
as well as possible, but w/ a bottle jack I'd expect less


Bill <http://mars.ark.com/~squeeze/>


------------------------------


Subject: Re: Press Construction
From: Claude Jolicoeur <cjoli@gmc.ulaval.ca>
Date: Fri, 23 Dec 2005 02:59:45 -0500


In Cider Digest #1286, 22 December 2005
>Subject: Press Construction
>From: "drcath@tiac.net" <drcath@tiac.net>
>Date: Tue, 20 Dec 2005 12:43:40 -0500
>
>For a welded steel press frame, what is an acceptable rating for a
>hydraulic bottle jack that will maximize juice extraction efficiency from a
>small rack and cloth set but will not place excessive stress on the frame
>welds?


Here are the basic stress calculations you need to make to insure your
press will be sturdy enough.


For the vertical members, the maximum stress is simply the load divided by
the steel area. So, assuming you have 2 vertical members made of 2" square
tubing with 3/16 wall thickness, you get:
Area = 2 * ((2 * 2) - ((2 - 3/8) * (2 - 3/8))) = 2.72 sq.inches total
With a 8 ton jack, you get
Stress = 16000 lbs / 2.72 = 5900 psi, which is quite low.


For the horizontal members, it is a bit more complicated as these work in
bending. The maximum stress is given by the bending moment divided by the
section modulus.
Bending moment is the load * width / 4, in your case, 20" width and a 8 ton
jack would give 80000 in.lb
Section modulus (Z), for a rectangular tubing beam, is given by:
Z = (bd^3 - hk^3)/6d
where b is the width, d is the height of the beam, 
k = d - 2*wall thickness, h = b - 2*wall thickness.
Assuming you use for the horizontal members 2x4 tubing with 1/4 wall
thickness, you would get:
b=2, d=4, h=1.5, k=2.5, and Z = 2.65 in^3
And the max stress would be 80000 / 2.65 = 30000 psi, which is too much for
standard steel - it would bend. With this type of structure, you don't want
any stress in excess of 20000 psi. You would then have to try again the
calculation, possibly with 3/8 wall thickness it would be OK - or you could
take a smaller jack. But, for sure, 2x2 square tubing will not make it.


For the welds, you may assume a capacity of about 1000 lbs per linear inch
of weld. A weld around a 2x4 tube is 10 inches long and can take 10000 lbs.
You have 2 (one each end), so 20000 lbs would be OK.


Hope this helps...


Claude Jolicoeur
today writing as a mechanical engineer for a change...


------------------------------


Subject: Re: using honey in bottle fermentation
From: Benjamin Watson <bwatson@worldpath.net>
Date: Fri, 23 Dec 2005 07:51:48 -0500


Seth Jones wrote:


> After three years restoring an old orchard on my property I had my
> first crop this year. At least enough for a couple carboys. I want to
> bottle ferment some sparkling cider and am interested in using honey
> rather than sugar for taste and "mouth feel". Should I use the same
> amount as sugar (2 tsp per bottle) or should I use more? Anyone have
> other advice? Should I use something other than honey? How does that
> taste come out? I have a blend of baldwins, northern spys and rhode
> island greening. It's pretty tart after the first ferment. Thanks for
> the advice. You guys are pretty impressive, I tried a lot of your
> ciders at Cider Day this year...


One of the more scientific people in this group (Gary, Claude, Andrew, 
etc. etc.) will probably weigh in with more authority. But my gut 
reaction is that secondary (bottle) fermentation with honey would be a 
BAD idea. I can't even tell you why (without more coffee and research), 
and perhaps you should try a couple of bottles just for the sheer 
thrill of it. But I wouldn't risk one or two carboys' worth, if that's 
all you're making this year.


Adding honey to your juice for primary fermentation is fine -- it makes 
cyser -- but I would suspect that there would be flavor and 
fermentation problems with using a dosage of honey at bottling time. 
For one thing, it might generate too much CO2 in a closed bottle if 
substituted one for one with priming sugar. But more importantly, along 
with the mouthfeel I suspect you might create a drastically different, 
and probably odd, taste profile.


I have two suggestions. The first is to leave the fermented cider to 
mellow over the winter in the carboys. I generally rack once and then 
leave the cider alone until April or May, and find that this greatly 
improves the taste. It will mature in the bottle as well, but if the 
object is to improve the taste, then in my experience you have a better 
chance of encouraging malolactic fermentation by keeping it in a carboy 
or buik container under airlock. (If there are some lees at the bottom, 
so much the better, in terms of stimulating ML fermentation.) This will 
have the effect of converting some of the malic acid to lactic acid, 
reducing the perceived sharpness, and improving the mouthfeel.


The second thing you might try using, if you're bent on addng something 
other than sugar,, is a small amount of boiled cider (cider evaporated 
down  to about 1/5 to 1/8 of its original volume). This is a 
traditional product that can still be found in VT and NH. I guess I am 
on the frontier of trying to use it for secondary fermentation, since I 
have a small experimental batch of ice cider from last spring that was 
VERY sharp (lots of Baldwin) and not very strong (only 9%). So, just 
for a hoot, I added about half a cup of boiled cider to a one-gallon 
fermenter. It sank to the bottom and stayed there, and I had to repitch 
with a fairly aggressive wine yeast to get it going again, but then if 
fermented slowly and steadily, with fine, small bubbles. Now the color 
is quite nice, and I'm about to rack it off and perhaps 
bottle-pasteurize the stuff to leave a bit of residual sweetness if it 
tastes good. I'll try to post the results, good or bad. But boiled 
cider may be an underutilized substance for cidermaking. I plan to make 
a batch of New England cider with it this winter.


Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year to all!


Ben Watson
Francestown, NH


------------------------------


Subject: apple brandy
From: "Howard, John" <jhoward@beckerfrondorf.com>
Date: Fri, 23 Dec 2005 09:53:27 -0500


I'm happy to see this topic come up. Could someone share a bibliography?
Cheers!  John Howard


------------------------------


Subject: Re: using honey in bottle fermentation
From: Tim Bray <tbray@mcn.org>
Date: Fri, 23 Dec 2005 08:55:23 -0800


Seth,


I've done exactly that and it worked well.  You do need to use a little 
more honey than sugar, for two reasons:  Honey is 20% water, and it is not 
quite as fermentable as pure cane sugar.  It's almost impossible to dose 
bottles individually; much better to mix the honey into the entire batch 
before bottling.  For a 5-gallon batch, I would use about 1 cup of honey, 
or more for really fizzy champagne-style cider.  Mix the honey with an 
equal amount of boiling hot water, then mix the syrup into the cider, then 
bottle.


The taste and body of a thin, sharp cider is much improved by the honey 
notes, which will remain after in-bottle fermentation.  Much depends on the 
yeast.  Even a good dry cider can be improved by honey!


You can get better cider from dessert apples by waiting to pick them until 
they are completely ripe, falling off the tree; then age them in cool (not 
cold) storage until they lose their crispness.   Acidity goes down, starch 
disappears, sugar goes up, and flavor improves.  Risk of spoilage or 
infection also increases, but can be controlled with careful use of sulfite 
and yeast.


Cheers,
Tim


------------------------------


Subject: Re: 2005 Glows Competition (dubious entries?)
From: Dick Dunn <rcd@talisman.com>
Date: Sat, 24 Dec 2005 16:56:02 -0700


Prompted by some off-list discussion, and looking back at the full results
of the recent GLOWS competition in Michigan (see digest 1283 and the web
sites referenced by Jeff Carlson's article), I see that Strongbow was
awarded a Silver medal in the Standard Cider category, English sub-category.


Regardless of whether you like or loathe Strongbow, there's something gone
wrong here.  The BJCP definition of the Standard Cider category includes
this note:
    The Standard category covers ciders and perries made primarily or
    entirely from the juice of apples or pears (but not both at once).
    The only adjunct permitted in the Standard category, and only in some
    sub-categories, is a limited addition of sugar to achieve a suitable
    starting gravity.
Yet Strongbow is generally known, from various industry sources, to be
significantly less than -half- juice.  This is comparable to most UK mass-
market ciders, but it's neither the style nor the ingredients expected of
an English style cider.  Compare, if you will, that you wouldn't expect
Budweiser to be entered, let alone win, in an American Pale Ale category.


I don't explicitly mean to single out Strongbow; it's just that it sticks
out like a sore thumb in the results.  Add, for example, although I don't
have any juice-composition information for Woodpecker (Bronze in the
English category at GLOWS), I do see label information noting that it's
got water, sugar, malic acid, caramel color, and "natural apple flavors"
added, so it is also hardly an English Cider according to even a loose
interpretation of the style guidelines.  Note that although sugar might
be allowed to adjust SG upward as needed, water isn't allowed, and also
if they're adding water they can't need sugar.  Plus, flavorings and
caramel color are right out.


I don't see this as a matter of "fault" so much as a growing-pain sort of
problem in getting a competition going right.  Probably the competition
organizers need to make the style rules particularly clear to the commercial
entrants, WRT ingredients.
- -- 
Dick Dunn          rcd@talisman.com          Hygiene, Colorado  USA


------------------------------


Subject: RE: Cider Digest #1286, 22 December 2005
From: "Mike Beck" <mjbeck@ujcidermill.com>
Date: Sun, 25 Dec 2005 14:22:47 -0500


Apple Distillation Discussion


A MSU researcher (Kris Berglund) has published an excellent guide for
artisan distilling.  He has used some of my apple mashes to collect data on
pome fruit.  It is a free guide and Kris would probably send you a email
version. (berglund@msu.edu)  I have my own distillery in Michigan, legal of
course.  I will have brandy available in a another year, Until then I can
only use it for my fortified apple wine.  (legal requirements on aging)
Soon I will be firing up my still for this seasons distillations.  It is
great fun and I encourage anyone to get the licensing and get product out on
the market.  There are 10 distilleries in this state and half of them are
making apple based products.


Merry Christmas and a Happy Wassail!


Mike Beck
Uncle John's Cider Mill
Uncle John's Fruit House Winery & Distillery


------------------------------


Subject: Re: Cider brandy
From: michael arighi <calzinman@earthlink.net>
Date: Sun, 25 Dec 2005 23:08:48 -0800


This topic caught my eye because I just ran into exactly this on a
recent trip to southern Germany. Near the Bodensee, on the
Austro-Swiss-German border, there are a lot of people distilling spirits
from various fruits--apples, pears, cherries. My impression is that this
is a modernized version of a traditional craft. Anyway, I happened to
run into one rather interesting variation on it (of which I brought a
bottle home). It is a "Cox-Orange," distilled from Cox's Orange Pippin
and with about a 2-3% post-distillation add-back of juice. Softens the
alcohol and very slightly sweetens it. Also dramatically "punches out"
the aroma.


I had it at a friend's house initially, then located it in the weekly
outdoor market. Quite a number of the fruit sellers appeared to do this
as a relatively regular adjunct to their fruit sales--fermenting and
distilling (probably their production overruns from the garden). Best of
all, most of them had a few glasses behind the counter and were happy to
offer you a free taste of anything that struck your fancy. A lovely, but
inherently dangerous, way to enjoy the market. Dangerous because, unlike
wine tasting, 39% abv spirits will put you under quickly, not to speak
of palate fatigue.


If any of you happen to get around the Uberlingen area in
Baden-Wurttemburg state, on Lake Constance, I strongly recommend
checking out the Saturday morning market (at least in the late
Spring--don't know how late in the year it lasts).


Michael Arighi
Oakland CA


------------------------------


Subject: RE: Press Construction
From: "chris horn" <agent_strangelove@hotmail.com>
Date: Tue, 27 Dec 2005 08:18:54 -0800


>For a welded steel press frame, what is an acceptable rating for a
>hydraulic bottle jack that will maximize juice extraction efficiency from a
>small rack and cloth set but will not place excessive stress on the frame
>welds?


Well in terms of stess in welds...  It depends on how the thing is 
designed....  A few ball park guide lines on the strenth of welds (assuming 
good weldings and loads in shear...) per inch of weld length: 1/8" 1200lbs., 
1/4" 2400lbs., 1/2"4800lbs.....


Best of luck,


Chris Horn
Scappoose Oregon USA
(Mech. Engineer in my non-cider life....)




'Procrastination is opportunity's assassin.'
Victor Kiam


------------------------------


Subject: Re: past articles
From: Benjamin Watson <bwatson@worldpath.net>
Date: Tue, 27 Dec 2005 14:51:56 -0500




Terry Mayne wrote:


> I am fairly new to this site.  I have questions on freezing cider, before
> and after fermentation to remove water.  Before I post my questions is
> there a way to look up old postings to see if it has been discussed?


Based on the Cider Janitron's recent comments about distillation -- to 
wit, that it is probably not good to be sharing detailed information 
about "doing it yourself" unless the "yourself" involved has a permit 
from the federal government -- I would make a distinction here between 
freezing and concentrating fresh cider before fermentation (absolutely 
legal for any purpose, so far as I know, including fermenting the 
concentrated juice into ice cider, which is still considered wine) and 
concentrating hard cider after fermentation, which is the method 
(fractional crystallization is the ten-cent term) for making 
traditional applejack (a.k.a., "cider oil").


The government considers the production of applejack equivalent to 
distillation, and it is similarly illegal to do it without a license, 
even though one would be hard-pressed to make an applejack that's much 
over 18-20% abv.


More importantly, applejack is rather nasty stuff and not recommended, 
because it concentrates all of the impurities that a distiller would 
discard from an eau de vie or brandy in the "heads" and the "tails" of 
the run. Gradually concentrating the applejack by freezing and thawing 
separates the pure ice from these "impure" compounds. And the effects 
of drinking any quantity of such stuff are not pleasant -- wicked 
headaches at best, and spasmodic muscle reactions (once known as "apple 
palsy") at the worst.


In my opinion, it is far better to make a safe (and legal, for home 
consumption) homemade pommeau of about the same strength as applejack 
by adding enough purchased apple brandy or eau de vie to fresh cider to 
keep it from fermenting. I have gotten good results by mixing them 
roughly half and half, or a little lighter.


For a good historical and technical look at applejack or cider oil, 
though, there is Sanborn Brown's excellent book, The Wines & Beers of 
Old New England (Univ. of New England Press, 1978).


Ben Watson
Francestown, NH


------------------------------


Subject: Re:  Harrison scionwood question
From: "John C. Campbell III" <jccampb@tseassoc.com>
Date: Wed, 28 Dec 2005 08:50:00 -0500


Well, I put an inquiry to the Honorable Tom Burford and got this in 
response:


> "...John, I have recollection of Nick (Botner) getting scions of 
> Harrison from me soon after I located the trees (actually, they 
> were in two sites one in NH and the other NJ).
>  I was and am very comfortable with the identification of the 
> Harrison and the Campfield, as well, for the most part because of the 
> descriptions and drawings in Cox's annotated copy of his /A View of 
> the Orchard/ ....that he did not live to complete and publish. It was 
> in the Library of Congress archives and I arranged to have a copy made 
> that I am now "preparing" for future publication.
>  The Harrison has enormous potential. What the Newtown Albemarle 
> Pippin is to Martinelli the Harrison could be to another vintage cider 
> of the world.
>  Best wishes.....Tom ..."


Regretfully I had hoped to offer some further clinical  information 
regarding the chemical composition of the Harrisons with this post. 
(realizing of course that 'terroir' would dictate the information might 
not hold true for everyone who grew the apples).   I sent an e-mail to 
one of the presenters at the CiderMakers forum (Diane Flynt ... Blue 
Ridge Cider in Laurel Fork, Va. http://blueridgeorchard.com ) who I 
believe provided the Harrison juice for the Shelton's presentation ... 
asking her if she'd gotten measurements on the juice, (to get us in the 
ballpark) Brix, SG, acidity, etc. ... and for some odd reason she never 
chose to  respond  to me. (maybe if I were buying some cider from her at 
the same time -snicker-) As Lazarus Long said: 
" ... Never appeal to a man's "better nature." He may not have one. 
Invoking his self-interest gives you  more leverage." ...


Now, if Brother Burford will please just hurry up and re-find the "Holy 
Grail" of American cidermakers, the genuine Talifero apple ...  because 
if anyone does, he's going to be the one who finds it.
jccampb


------------------------------


Subject: cider brandy in Australia
From: warwick <tokolosh@penalvagold.net>
Date: Thu, 29 Dec 2005 18:10:45 +1030


Hi Digest
There are a few smaller stills legally around in Australia, Kellybrook, 
near Melbourne make a Calvados and I have heard of several others who would 
like to start up.  My understanding of the paperwork is that it remains 
onerous, as well as bonds required.
New Zealand on the other hand appears far more enlightened and anecdotally 
there is no longer much regulation of home distilling.  I tried a 
commercial apple grappa from NZ recently, it showed promise.  On a similar 
note does anyone from the digest have any experience of growing pears in 
bottles a la Poire William, how do they do it and does it work for apples?


cheers
Warwick


------------------------------


End of Cider Digest #1287
*************************